PROFESSOR: Now, I talked about this already a little bit.
Why is it important to know whether there is a poverty
trap?
Why do we care?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Because when you're trying to improve the poverty
level, you have to be aware if there's a trap
or not to know if your aid will help.
PROFESSOR: In the short run or in the long run?
So you're saying you want to learn about
whether the aid is helpful.
I'm asking in the short run or in the long run?
STUDENT: In the long run, because it
will help in the short, but if there's an income trap,
then you'll get pushed right back down.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if you're in a situation like this,
for example, if you start here, for example, or somewhere here,
aid will always improve people's income,
or their earnings, or their consumption,
et cetera in the short run.
But if there is no trap, everybody
will end up in the same place anyway
even if temporarily they're somewhat richer for a while.
So in the long run, if there is no poverty trap,
it doesn't matter in the long run
whether there was aid versus not for people's long run outcomes.
Of course, aid might be still very helpful
in the short run for people.
People are better off.
Potentially, they can eat more, they're happier, and so on,
but if you're interested in long run poverty alleviation,
then you need to learn about whether there is a poverty
trap, because the poverty trap might precisely
create situations where short run interventions are
able to affect long run outcomes, right?
So in this situation, you're sort of
stuck in the steady state always in the long run
where you are, regardless of--
even if you give people a lot of money,
they would eventually converge back
to their starting point or the steady state.
In this situation, you have the potential
to move people from one steady state to the next, OK?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I don't think I understand the [? extreme ?]
examples intuitively for why it would push back
to a lower steady state.
For a small income [INAUDIBLE] benefit,
but for larger [INAUDIBLE]?
PROFESSOR: It's just to say you need to essentially intersect
with a 45-degree line.
And if you're here, and I give you a huge amount of money,
you end up here.
You're going to just converge back to the steady state
regardless.
STUDENT: But why?
PROFESSOR: Because there's no--
STUDENT: I understand the steady state assumption,
but that's [INAUDIBLE].
I don't know why.
PROFESSOR: It's just to say there's some productivity
that people have where, essentially, you
produce some income and that income you produce
is not enough to be larger than your previous income
that you have.
That's to say, essentially, eating more food makes
you somewhat more productive.
Notice that these curves are all kind of increasing,
but it's not the case that it makes you disproportionately
more productive.
As in if I give you $100, it's not the case you might be--
so your income goes up by $100.
Your income in the next period will go up by $95,
and then the income in the next period will go up by $90.
So essentially, what you would need is that the income,
your future income, would have to increase by more than $100
to have-- or at least as much as $100--
to make that sort of persistent over time.
And if your income only goes up by a bit but not enough,
if the relationship is not sufficiently steep,
then essentially, you're just going to go-- at some point,
you have $90, $80, $70, and so on, you're
going to just converge back.
OK?
So if you had the situation here,
if this curve was steeper, then at some point,
you might be in a situation where
you could essentially-- this change would be self sustained.
You would keep making $100 more every period.
And so that's to say, in the nutrition case,
it would be the case I give you $20,
and now, you can earn $50 more every day
because you're more productive.
Then you're going to end up in a better place persistently.
Does that makes sense?
So you essentially need a disproportional gain
in income in the future or currently due
to some other income that you get.
Mikey?
STUDENT: An example of that would be
is if you were given a $1,000, and you spent it
on a party, and alcohol, or whatever, then it's
not going to help your future income.
And then you revert back to the previous state.
PROFESSOR: Right.
Or put differently, what Mikey is saying
is, well, if people just wasted their money trivially, then,
in some sense, your future income
might not increase even if you gave a lot of money to people.
But also, if people just don't have very productive ability
to invest in their nutrition or other types of things,
then you're just--
getting money is not able to increase your productivity
or your earnings in the future.
And what needs to be the case is that you get this money once,
and then by investing that money,
or by eating more, or investing it
in machines, or other types of things, your health and so on,
your future income has to increase by at least as
much over time to sustain that type of effect.
Which means, essentially, you have
to make it somewhere above the 45-degree line.
And at some point, you're going to end up
at the 45-degree line at a consistently higher level.
STUDENT: So once we define income
in terms of consumption, investment, or whatever,
and we adjust multipliers, and we
know a little more [INAUDIBLE].
OK, yeah.
PROFESSOR: The key question is, does your ability
to earn income increase sufficiently much
by some short run increase in income?
And if the answer is yes, you might end up
in a higher steady state.
Potentially, if the answer is no, you will not.
OK.
OK, we talked about policy already,
so if there is a poverty trap, then there
could be a big push, as in a small action could
have big benefits.
So it may be socially optimal thing to do.
So you might say that there is good reason for the government
just to give people cash, or other types of nutrition,
and so on to make people temporarily richer or better
nourished, because then they would increase their ability
to earn income, and that would persistently
keep them richer, OK?
And that would say we can help people get out
of a poverty trap potentially.
And many food programs or food interventions
have exactly that idea that to say,
well, people could be a lot more productive
if only they ate more.
And so now, we give people a bunch of food and hope
that people become more productive.
And that's what we're going to try and test now going forward.
Now on the other hand, if there is no poverty trap,
helping people in this way is still
going to be potentially helpful in the sense
that you give people money or food,
they're going to eat that food.
They're going to be less hungry and so on.
And they're going to be happier and healthier and so on.
However, that's going to be temporary.
It's not going to have any long-run effects, right?
The long-run effects you only get if there's a poverty trap
situation if you can move people to a higher
steady state potentially.
So if there's no nutrition poverty trap, for example,
you might just give people cash instead of giving people food.
There's not a lot of good arguments for giving people
food if you think that people are not trapped
in some nutrition poverty trap, and they're not
eating enough as much as they perhaps should.
And so then you might say giving people cash transfers,
why not just give them cash and let them choose anyway
unless you think there's something about food that
helps people invest in themselves in some way
that they're better off.
STUDENT: It's equivalent up to a certain point
based on what they spend on food.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly, and then they could choose
to spend it on food and other things, whatever
makes them happy.
And [INAUDIBLE] say what are we going to do next?
Next, we're going to look for a nutrition poverty trap.
What we're going to look at, we're
going to test the idea now empirically
whether low income leads to low nutritional intake,
and whether that, in turn, leads to low productivity and income.
So the ideal test that we would like
to do is we'd like to look at does the capacity curve
intersect with the 45-degree line from below?
That's to say, the , capacity curve needs to be steep
somewhere with a slope above 1, right?
If you intersect the 45-degree line from below,
that means your slope has to be very high,
and the slope has to be above 1.
And so then we're going to ask is,
does an increase in income today result
in an income tomorrow even larger
than the increase in income today?
That's what we're going to try and test.
Notice that the capacity curve has actually two parts to it.
There's the caloric intake as a function of income.
If I make you richer, do you eat more calories?
That's one part of it.
The second part is income as a function of caloric intake.
We're going to look at both of these.
We're going to look at the impact of increased
income on caloric intake.
Once you have more money, do you eat more food?
And second, we're going to look at the impact of increased
caloric intake on productivity.
Now, do you actually become more productive and earn more money?
And crucially, what we're going to need
is that the combination of those two things needs to be strong.
So just having one of those things being true
is not even enough.
We need to be a very strong relationship
between once people have more money, they eat more
and once people eat more, they become more productive
and earn more money.