PROFESSOR: What can we do now to reconcile this?
Really what we would want is evidence of unconditional cash
transfers.
Ideally what we were looking for is all along, which is to say
suppose I dropped some money from the sky
and gave it to people, what would happen
to people's caloric intake?
OK.
And this, as you already learned a little bit
about from GiveDirectly in class on Monday,
GiveDirectly is this NGO that essentially gives people
unconditional cash transfers.
What does that mean?
Essentially, they give people money unconditionally
and transfer them to people's phones.
And what unconditional means essentially
people can do with this money whatever they want.
OK.
And so now what we can do is we can look at these cash transfer
RCTs.
And we can look at now as people get more money
through this RCT, do they actually
spend more money on calories?
OK.
And so now here's the RCT.
This is an RCT done in Kenya in collaboration
with GiveDirectly.
What they were doing is they were looking they recruited
poor households in Kenya.
How do you how do you know whether somebody is poor?

How would you choose whether people are poor?
Whether they should be in your sample?

Yeah.
STUDENT: The bottom 10% of income.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
But how would you practically do it?

Go around and ask people?
Or how would you figure out whether somebody's poor?
STUDENT: If they're receiving like welfare from government.
PROFESSOR: You could look at, do they
receive government transfers?
Lucas.
STUDENT: You do kind of a physical survey.
So one, asking them how much they make.
And also looking at what they have in their home,
and doing based on that.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Exactly.
You can look at people's assets.
The trouble is like if you go around and asking like,
how poor are you, and people know that you're
going to give them $1,000, people will tell you
they're very poor potentially.
And so what GiveDirectly was trying to do
is looking at sort of fixed characteristics
of people's houses.
In particular, they're looking at,
for example, what kind of roof do you have on your house.
And that's kind of hard to change in the very short run.
And people with certain houses are
deemed to be poor enough to qualify for this study
and others were not.
But that's kind of broadly you're
looking for assets that are hard to change.
So some people were then randomized
to receive cash transfers.
It's more complicated than that.
But there's a pure control group that essentially just getting
nothing.
And there's a treatment group who are giving a treatment--
meaning they get essentially a bunch of money.
There was other random variation.
And for example, if there was like a male and female person
living in that household, some households
were randomized in the treatment group
to get where the male person received the transfer.
In other households, the female person and others,
they just had only one person.
There's also a variation in whether the transfer was
monthly versus lump sum.
And there was also some variation in how large
the transfer was.
Some people were getting small transfers,
and others were getting large transfers.
Notice you might wonder about ethical issues here.
Potentially, is that fair or is it OK to do this?
Well, notice that GiveDirectly, at least at the time,
didn't have enough money to give money to everybody.
So then the question is like, whom
should you give money potentially
among the many people who might really benefit from it?
So then randomizing seems like a fair thing
to allocate these resources.
At the time, there was still some randomization
within villages.
Like some people in the village were getting money,
and others did not.
They're not doing that anymore precisely
because they're worried about people getting upset
or people getting really sad.
And like your neighbor got a lot of cash and you didn't.
So now any of these studies that they're doing essentially
is only across villages, which have mitigates these concerns
at least to some degree.
But anyway, what we're trying to look for now
is well now some people are getting money
and others do not.
We're going to look for now is how much does
people's consumption change.
In particular interest in people's caloric intake.
So what we're going to look at we're
going to look at people's consumption in the treatment
and control group.
This is a typical regression table
that's in some sense you don't need
to know too many details of.
But in some sense, very simply these tables typically
have a control mean, which is how much does the control
group spend on food or other types of items in this case.
This is all per month in US dollars.
So the control group for example spends about $104 per month
on food.
Then there's a treatment effect in column 2,
which is the difference between treatment and control.
OK.
So this is going to say how much more does the treatment
group spend on food compared to the control group.
And then columns 3 to 5 we're going to ignore mostly.
These are the additional effects of whether there's
a female versus male recipient, whether there's
a monthly versus lump sum transfer, and so on.
Then there's a standard error of this difference, which
essentially sort of tells you something about how
precise this effect is.
And then there's little stars next to the number, which
should say, well, is this statistically significant?
Is this to say if we did this experiment 100 times
without any treatment, how often would it
be the case that we would find treatment
effects of this magnitude?
Could this be just by chance?
And if there's three stars here that essentially
means that it's very, very unlikely that these differences
are rising just by chance.
Anyway.
So what we see here is that the key thing
I want you to focus on is transfers increased total food
expenditures by $19.46.
And this is about 18.6% relative to the control group.
OK.
So you give people a bunch of money.
They increase their food expenditures.
Now, overall, expenditures increase by 22.6%.
This number here overall expenditures are here $35.66.
Relative to $157.61.
That's to say, overall expenditures
increase by about 22.6%.
And food expenditures by about 18.6%.
What is our elasticity or what can we
say now about this elasticity of food with respect
to expenditures?

Yeah.
STUDENT: It's like a little under one.
PROFESSOR: It's a little bit under one.
It's something like 0.8.
Notice that I'm using sort of expenditures and income
interchangeably.
What's missing here is like durable expenditures,
which you can abstract from.
But let's just say if you have something like--
if you spend $35.66 how much of that goes towards food?
And the answer is like about 19.46.
And the question is, does this proportionally more or less
than what you did before?
The answer is less than disproportionately.
It's about 0.8.
OK so the overall.
So what we're going to do here now is to say,
well, we have this increase of 18.6%.
Now one issue is that one thing you could do
is just say take the income transfer-- people are giving
something like $300 or $500.
Just divide the increase in expenditures by the transfer.
But that's not quite right because this
is monthly expenditures, and people
spend the transfer over time.
So really what we want is like we
want to divide the proportional increase in food expenditures
by the proportional increase in nondurable expenditures.
That is to say food expenditures increased by 18.6%.
Overall expenditures increased by about 22.6%.
The ratio of the two is about 0.8.
OK.
That's to say, again, we have an elasticity of below 1.
Now does that make sense what we're doing here?
We're seeing how much are people increasing their expenditures?
By what percentage do overall expenditures go up?
Do we see food expenditures that are disproportionately large
compared to that?
Now I'm talking to you about food expenditures.
Is that the right thing to look at?
What do we want to look at instead?

Yeah, Olivia.
STUDENT: Caloric intake.
PROFESSOR: Caloric intake.
Really, this is food expenditures.
And why do we want to look at caloric intake instead?
STUDENT: This is to where we can't--
nourishment.
Like malnourishment.
And food expenditure, you could be spending more like we
saw in the last example.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah.
And so if we're interested in caloric intake,
do we expect this a lot larger or smaller?

Yeah.
STUDENT: I think it was smaller in [? the last one. ?]
PROFESSOR: Smaller.
Right.
Because you essentially start eating more expensive food.
Notice that we actually see a little bit of this.
If you look at the effect on cereals,
it's about a 10% increase.
Like 0.23 divided by 22.5.
When you look at the effect on fish and meat,
you see essentially it's 5 divided by 12.9.
That's much larger.
That's to say we see already some
of this substitution happening.
So now what then [INAUDIBLE] et al. did,
they looked at food prices and estimates of calories
in the area.
And try to look at can we back out,
based on what people reported, can
be back out what people's caloric intake is.
And by doing that they find an elasticity of about 0.6.