
PROFESSOR: Now we're going to look at the dynamics of income
over time.
Suppose that this curve is the way it is.
I drew it in a slightly different way.
Notice that it's fairly similar to this.
It doesn't really matter how it looks like on the left.
What's important is that we have some form of an S shape
like we have here.
So notice that there's also an S shape here.
Notice that I changed the y-axis as well.
Now here on the y-axis, we have future income.
On the previous axis, we had work capacity.
What are we assuming here?
What's different or what's the difference here?

Yeah.
Elliot?
STUDENT: Work capacity directly translates into future income,
so it'll reflect on the past [? or present. ?]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Work capacity I described previously
as your output, your productivity--
how much would you produce in a given firm,
on a factory, on a construction site, on the farm, and so on?
This is like your marginal product.
How much are you producing if you work for an hour
or for a day?
Notice that that's not necessarily what your wage is.
You might be paid a very flat wage, regardless
of how much you produce.
In many jobs, you're essentially paid
a flat wage that doesn't necessarily
depend on your productivity.
What we're assuming here is that your income
is proportional in some ways to your work capacity, OK?
Now, we also drew like a 45-degree line here.
So on the x-axis, we have, again, past or current income.
On the y-axis, we have future income.
Now, I also drew like a 45-degree line.
What is the role of the 45-degree line?
What do we need the 45-degree line for?
Yeah, [? Lucas? ?]
STUDENT: Because essentially your current income,
when you go up a year, your future income now
becomes your current income, so it converges to the--
PROFESSOR: Right.
Suppose these were like days or weeks, and so on, at a time.
If I wanted to know how things evolve over time,
I would go from current income.
I go to the curve and say, what does my future income
look like, which is the capacity curve.
And then I go to the 45-degree line,
when future income, in a week from now,
future income is like current income,
and I can do the same thing over and over again.
I'm going to show you that in a second.
But what are the points where the capacity curve intersects
with the 45-degree line?
What are those?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Points where your income stagnates-- where
it doesn't change over time.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
We call them stagnates or like it doesn't change over time.
We call these steady states.
Potentially, if you are exactly at this point-- for example,
the point that's drawn here on the figure--
if you're exactly on this point, you
will just stay at this point and nothing
will happen unless there's some shock or something that
pushes you one way or the other, right?
Because your current income exactly is your future income.
You will not move at all.
We call these steady states.
Nothing is moving once you're there.
But now, let's suppose you were at start at y 0 prime,
the way I've drawn it on the very left.
How does your income evolve?
How do we think about that?

Suppose you're here.
Now, how do we-- where are we going from here?
What is the evolution of your income over time?
Yeah.
[INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: I think so you can draw zigzag lines until you--
and then you end up at that point, the first steady state,
and then unless something perturbs you.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but let me--
just walk me through.
If I'm at y 0 prime, where do I go-- why
do I go to the capacity curve?
How do I how do I end up there?
STUDENT: Because that's going to be your future income.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So if I'm at current income y 0 prime, that's there.
I go up to see what is my future income,
and that's what the capacity curve shows.
OK.
Now, why am I going then to the right?
STUDENT: Because it's a 45-degree line.
It's going to tell you after a time step,
this is now your current income.
And then yeah.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
I'm going to the 45-degree line, because now once time passes,
future income becomes past or current income,
and so now the 45-degree line tells me
where I will be on the x-axis.
Because there future income equals current income.
So now I'm going to be at Y1 prime.
Yeah, [? Julie? ?]
STUDENT: I'm so sorry is this a hypothesis, or is this the way
it is?
PROFESSOR: I mean, this is the hypothesis is this.
This is what the capacity curve looks like.
That's hypothesized.
And we're going to try and see if that were true,
what would happen with income over time.
Later on in the second half of the lecture,
we're going to look at, well, do we actually
have evidence that this capacity curve looks this way?
And do we actually find some evidence of a poverty trap?
But this curve is very much like hypothesized.
It's hypothesized to look this way in part given the arguments
that we were saying earlier.
We're saying, essentially, like this is a slightly
different than before.
But we're saying there's some part where
essentially additional nutrition doesn't do very much.
It doesn't make you much more productive.
Then there's a part where additional nutrition is
very helpful for increasing your productivity and income,
and then it flattens off later.
That's what we previously discussed,
but it's very much like assume suppose this looks like,
what we expect to happen.
OK, so now we're at like y 1.
What happens after that?
So now we are like here.
Now what do we do next?

Yeah?
STUDENT: You repeat the same process.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
We do the exact same thing.
We find the corresponding future income
level on the capacity curve.
Once time passes, future income becomes past or current income.
We go essentially now to y 2 prime, which is here
on the 45-degree line, and we keep
doing that until we converge to a point at steady state,
where future and current income is the same.
So this is still a steady state.
We have the steady state here.
OK.
Now, suppose we started instead at y 0 double prime.
We started here instead.
I already drew it for you.
What might happen is instead of now going to this steady state,
you will end up going up here to the 45-degree line and so on,
and you end up at this other steady state,
further to the right, OK?
Now, what if instead you started somewhere here instead,
a little bit to the right of [? y 1, ?] [? y 3 ?] prime?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You go down to the first point.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So you can do this-- you can do this as an exercise yourself.
You can try out different parts.
Essentially, if you're somewhat to the right,
if you're in the region between this steady state
and this steady state, you're going to go to the left.
So everybody wants to start essentially in this area
until here goes to the left.
Everybody who starts here goes to the right and end up there.
Everybody who is to the right of this steady state
here goes to the right here, to this other steady state
where everybody who is very rich also ends up there, OK?
So what determines where people end up in steady state--
what determines is your past or current income.
That is to say, if you start with a high or low income, that
will be very important for where you end up in the future.
And now, what does that tell us about the potential
of some income transfers or some one-time transfers
to change people's outcomes?

Yeah?
STUDENT: You could potentially push people
into a different range where their new steady state
income is higher.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if you had somebody who was sitting somewhere
here in this area and you gave them a little bit of land,
a little bit of money that's regular money that you
could get, now--
or even just a one-time transfer of some money where they could
buy more food or the like, they would move--
the current income would move here,
and suddenly, they would move up over there, OK?
So essentially, we have the potential
through one-time or short-run interventions
to change people's outcomes in the very long run
by changing their steady states potentially.
How many steady states do we have?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Two right here.
PROFESSOR: What about this one?
STUDENT: Or I guess that--
I don't think we'll ever reach that one because--
PROFESSOR: What's different between this steady state
and that steady state compared to this one?
STUDENT: The direction in which you're moving across it.
PROFESSOR: So what happens in the vicinity
of the steady state here?
If you're a little bit to the left, a little bit
to the right, what happens?
STUDENT: You'll fall down to it.
PROFESSOR: You go back to that steady state
if you're a little bit to the left or to the right.
The same is happening here.
If you're a little bit to the left,
a little bit to the right, you move to that steady state.
This is what people refer to as a stable steady state, as
in like everything in the vicinity of that essentially
moves people to that steady state.
This one is an unstable steady state,
because if you're a little bit to the left,
a little bit to the right, you're not going to stay there.
You're going to move to the other steady states.
OK?
And then maybe there, in some sense,
here is also a steady state here on the very left,
but then you have nothing to eat,
and you probably starve, so we're not
going to think about this part very much.
OK.
Any questions so far?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Is the assumption that after the curve
continues there will be endless steady state
until the end [INAUDIBLE]?
PROFESSOR: We don't quite know how this continues.
I think we just say it flattens off and essentially just stays
here, but you could, in principle, this
could go further above.
There could be other steady states potentially,
but you would have to have some explanation of why it goes up
again.
STUDENT: At the end at some point, it does [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And so that's to say, essentially,
this would be the steady state for rich people, say.
But I think there might be other reasons why
people become richer.
Maybe they invest and other things, and so on and so forth.
Yeah.
But we're mostly interested in what
people refer to as a poverty trap, which
is the idea that there's multiple steady states.
So here, we actually have at least three steady states,
but two stable one.
This one is a stable one, and this is a stable one.
And where you start determines where you end up.
This is what we just discussed.
If you start somewhat on the left,
you're going to end up in the low steady state.
If you start further on the right,
you're going to end up at this high steady state, OK?
And this is what people refer to as a poverty trap.
People in particular who are in this area
here are trapped in poverty.
They're not able to make it to the other steady state.
Not because they're not capable and not
because they potentially couldn't be very productive,
but just because they're poor.
That is to say, they stay poor because they are poor.
And that's very much the idea of a poverty trap.