PROFESSOR: This is lecture 3 of 1473.
Today, we're going to talk about the nutrition poverty drop
and whether it exists.
We're going to talk about, for a large part, of what we're
going to call the capacity curve and the idea of a poverty trap.
So we can understand what is a poverty trap.
And what are the conditions for a poverty trap to emerge?
And we're going to use this concept of the poverty
trap the same way we use the concept of RCTs
throughout the class.
So we're going to apply, then, the idea of the poverty trap
to nutrition today.
But throughout the class, we're going
to use the concept of a poverty trap
to think about all sorts of other issues as well.
Then we're going to, in the second half,
then we're going to think about, well,
is there, in fact, a nutrition poverty trap?
Is there a poverty trap posed by nutrition or people
not eating enough, or as much as they perhaps could?
We're going to first look at do the poor spend everything
on food?
Or what do actually food expenditures
look like for the poor?
And we're going to look at two directions
of a causal impact between nutrition,
between caloric intake and income.
We're going to first look at the impact
of increased income on food expenditures
and caloric intake.
That is to say as people become richer, as we increase
people's income, do people actually eat more
or how much more?
And second, we're going to look at the other direction.
We're going to look at the impact of increased
caloric intake on productivity and income.
As people eat more, do they, in fact, become more productive
and earn more money?
So first, to set the stage, I want
to go back and talk a little bit about malnutrition and famine.
And sort of to say that while severe famine may be history,
so we are not in much of history of the world
has had very severe famines across the world, that
might be a history in the sense that that's not
a common phenomenon, unless there's conflict or other types
of severe issues that arise.
Malnutrition is very much not history and quite common
across the world.
If you look at the UN agency the FAO in Rome,
they try to look at how many people are undernourished
in the world in 2020.
They would say between 720 and 811 million people
were estimated to be malnourished.
Let me ask now, how do we measure this?
So how are they coming up with these numbers?

How would you determine whether somebody is malnourished?
Yeah?
STUDENT: If they're getting under a certain amount
of calories a day?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so you can try to figure out
what is a requirement a caloric requirement that a person has.
How many calories should you consume in a given day?
And then we can try to measure, through food diaries
or the like, we can try to measure
how people are below or above what
we think is that threshold.
And that's exactly, in fact, what the FAO does.
Angela?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: So there's two parts to this, exactly.
We're going to focus on mostly today,
we're going to focus mostly on caloric intake,
do you eat enough calories.
But you're exactly right.
Calories are not just calories.
Some food is very helpful in other ways, be that like iron
or other types of avoiding anemia, et cetera.
That could be a very useful in avoiding
diseases, and so on, and so forth.
And you might say you might have enough calories.
But you have-- you're malnourished
in terms of some characteristics of certain types of food
that you don't eat.
Today, we're going to focus mostly
on caloric intake, overall caloric--
how many calories are people eating.
Next week, when we talk about health,
Esther will talk in part also about the quality
of food, what type of food are people eating,
be that childhood nutrition but also for adults.
And could it be that the quality of food
or the types of food that people eat, beyond caloric intakes,
are important.
Today, we're going to just talk about do
you have enough calories in the sense that are you hungry
because you don't eat sufficiently many calories.
I want to emphasize that measuring these requirements
is tricky.
It's really hard to figure out how many calories does somebody
need to function well.
So the whole approach of trying to measure
exactly what that threshold is and how that threshold changes
over time is quite tricky, in part
because things change in terms of how much physical labor are
people doing.
Hygiene and other types of conditions changed as well.
That maybe what used to be a caloric requirement
might be different now because people are not
losing that many calories by being
sick, or diarrhea, et cetera.
Be that as it may, there's symptoms of malnutrition.
Anemia, this is like low iron, low BMI, small and thin
children.
What is BMI?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Body mass index.
PROFESSOR: Body mass index.
And what do we measure-- how would you measure my BMI?
How would you find that out?
STUDENT: You basically take a combination
of your height, your weight, and then you
compare that with other people in your same age range.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, it's a function of essentially height
per weight.
And then there's a threshold again
where you say if your BMI, I believe it's 18.5,
if your BMI is below 18.5, for example,
you would say have low BMI.
And if your BMI is above 30, I believe,
then it would be like people are categorized as high BMI
or overweight in some ways.
That's exactly right.
But we're going to look at-- not going
to look at just how much do people weigh because people,
of course, some people are tall and other people are not.
So we're going to look at that proportionally or in relation
to people's height.
That's exactly right.
Now, recent increases in food prices,
inflation in particular, have made things worse
in terms of malnutrition.
What you see here is the graph goes until 2017.
And so if you look at this graph further,
you would see some increase in malnutrition.
So why is an increase in food prices particularly bad,
perhaps, for the poor?
There's two reasons for that, potentially.

Compared to everybody else.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Spend a higher percentage of income
on food, generally.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, so A, the poor don't have that much money
to start with.
But they also spend a higher percentage
generally on food as part of their budget.
And so now, they're disproportionately
affected if food prices go up compared
to other prices of other goods that they consume less,
that the rich consume more of.
And second, what's the second issue that
might arise because of this?
And this is very much the story of [INAUDIBLE]..
What could happen once people eat less?
Yeah, Lucas.
STUDENT: Well, they become less productive in work.
They're more susceptible to health issues.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, there could be a vicious cycle.
There could be an impact on people's nutrition
or their capacity to work.
And as a result, there might be sustained effects.
You might be in some vicious cycle of low caloric intake
and low nutrition, low income and productivity.
And therefore, that goes on and on.
People are trapped in poverty potentially.
And this is a very important idea
in development economics, which we're going
to now consider more closely.