PROFESSOR: This is about nutrition now.
But notice on the left-hand side, we have-- on the y-axis,
we have work capacity.
On the x-axis, we have past or current income.
So I was telling a story about nutrition,
but you could also come up with other stories potentially.
What other channels could there be other than nutrition?
We're going to focus on nutrition today.
I just want to point out that this capacity
curve or this idea very much applies
to all sorts of other mechanisms or topics as well.
So what other channels could create a similar relationship?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Shelter.
PROFESSOR: Shelter.
And how?
STUDENT: I guess like a similar thing.
Like in the same way food could contribute to their health,
having a good shelter, like a place to sleep,
could contribute to their health and productivity.
And there's probably a positive correlation
between how good of a shelter they can have
and their amount of income.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so you're talking about shelter
and the idea being that shelter is good for your health.
It helps for your sleep.
It helps for maybe for anxiety or other types of diseases
that you might get, or like physical threats or other types
of issues that you might expose to if you
don't have enough shelter.
The poor might not have shelter.
They might be homeless.
And therefore, as you become richer,
you might become more productive.
There's a bit, then, a question of why
there might be an S-shaped curve or a linear curve.
But you're exactly right, shelter could be one mechanism,
more broadly, I guess, exposure to environmental conditions,
such as sleep, but also pollution, et cetera.
What else.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Medicine, like medical care.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so broadly speaking, health.
So I talked about nutrition, which is, of course, related
to health.
But you could also say health care more broadly.
It could be any types of medicine
that you have available that the poor just don't have available.
They're sick often.
And this is exactly what Esther, in fact, is
going to talk about next week.
And then as you become richer, you
might get then sufficiently rich that you
can afford health care and good health care,
and you become a lot more productive.
And as you become very rich, maybe then the additional money
doesn't matter so much anymore for your productivity.
That would be an example of health
creating this relationship.
Uh-huh.
STUDENT: It could be a relationship
with your access to transportation
to and from work.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, access to transportation, infrastructure
more broadly.
And how would that work?
STUDENT: Say you're poor, you don't really
have the money to get the access to transportation.
But as you have an increase in income
to the point where eventually you
can afford that transportation, and then your work
capacity increases, which [INAUDIBLE] there's
no really gain from having more access to transportation.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, for example, you
might say you live outside of the city,
it's very expensive to live in the city.
You then need to get access to reliable transportation
to get a regular job.
Now if you don't have a car or if you don't have access
to good public transportation, if you're poor, then
it's very impossible for you to get certain jobs.
But once you have more money or you get somewhat richer,
you might be able to buy a car, you
might be able to afford other transportation.
And then that allows you to become more productive,
get better jobs, and do certain jobs that wouldn't
be available to you otherwise.
Yeah, transportation, mm-hmm.
Christine.
STUDENT: Maybe education.
PROFESSOR: Education-- and how would that work?
STUDENT: So like the first few years education,
like learning how to read, write, or do basic math
and stuff like that, versus higher level schools, where
you would not see an increase in future.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so if you're--
at the extreme, you might say, if you're very poor,
you don't get a lot of education.
And therefore, you don't learn a lot of basics.
As you learn more, maybe you learn how to read and write,
but you'll not be able to do like a high paid tech
job or the like.
You really have to go to university
or to a secondary school at least.
And so notice that this is an intergenerational issue here.
If your parents are poor, the kids
will not receive good education.
And then you might be able--
might be stuck in a trap in, an intergenerational trap,
potentially, where, essentially, your ability to earn income
depends on your parents' income, potentially.
And the curve might very much look like this as well.
I'll take one more.
Javier.
STUDENT: I think what I was going to say was covered,
but maybe just like what calories are to health,
like the macro concept for like transportation and things
like that, are just like-- it's just like technology access.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, technology, access to technology,
maybe also access to credit or other types of opportunity,
access to the internet and so on,
and all sorts of types of information.
So there are many possible channels-- health, education
across generations, access to credit, savings
and investments, access to labor markets,
which I think was partially what you're
saying about transportation, but also
things like stress, depression, sleep deprivation,
which I think you're talking about,
in part, at least, when it comes to shelter.
We will study each of these topics one
by one throughout this course, using this capacity [INAUDIBLE]
the idea of potential poverty traps.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Is it fair to say that maybe as technology improves,
the curve becomes more linear?
Or is that like, you don't have enough data to say about that?
PROFESSOR: I think we don't know.
We can actually talk about now of the shape of this curve.
Notice that the shape of this curve is very much
like a hypothesis.
What we're going to try and test is, is there
a nutrition poverty trap?
And the idea of the nutrition poverty trap,
which we're going to talk about now, is a hypothesis.
And the question is, does it exist?
For each of these types of topics
the question is, do such traps exist,
which is very much an empirical question,
so we don't quite necessarily know how these curves evolve.
But I think it's a really important question to know.