PROFESSOR: So now, let me just summarize then what we saw.
So most studies that we have seen
have shown that there's a pretty robust increase
in food expenditures to total expenditures.
So if you increase people's overall expenditures,
food expenditures go up.
Notice that the exception was the Jensen and Miller
case that we saw, which might be a unique situation that's
not commonly happen very much.
But be that as it may, really any studies that have shown you
have an elasticity, that is clearly below 1.
That is to say, if you increase expenditures by 1%,
you will see food expenditures go up by less than 1%.
By something like 0.6% at best.
OK?
Now, as people become richer, they
don't increase caloric consumption proportionally,
in part because they substitute to other types of food,
perhaps because it tastes very good.
Now, this will make, essentially, the capacity curve
quite shallow because, essentially, it's
not the case that when people earn more money, they become--
they eat a lot more, and therefore they
become more productive.
Now, of course, the missing-- what's missing here?
What do we still need to do?
So now I've shown you, if income goes up,
nutrition goes up but by not very much.
What's the other piece that we need now?

Yeah?
STUDENT: So the impact of increased calorie intake
on productivity.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
And now we look for this.
Well, it turns out we actually don't
have a lot of great evidence for this.
Now one question you might first ask
is, well, why are people not eating more as they get richer?
Why they don't seize every available opportunity
to eat more if they can do so?
Well, maybe it's just the case that, in fact, it's
not particularly productive, as in maybe the productivity
gains of eating more are actually not that large.
And then if that's the case, well,
why not just eat yummier food or food
that you like better just because it's not
going to make a big difference for your productivity anyway?
And that's what we're going to look for now,
is we look at estimates of impact
of calories on productivity.
There's actually very few studies that exist.
There's one study by Strauss, 1986,
that studies the impact of calories on productivity
in Sierra Leone.
This is not an experiment, but Strauss uses the fact
that people eat less when the price of food goes up.
So they look at like, for exogenous reasons,
the price of food goes up, and now people eat less.
And now, can we see people being less or more productive?
Here's what they find.
He finds, essentially, that productivity goes up
as a function of nutrition.
That's good.
But again, we see some elasticity
of about something like 0.4.
We see essentially this function is concave.
It's not S-shaped at all.
It's not convex in any case.
The elasticity is highest among the poorest,
but it's about 0.4 among the poorest.
That's nowhere near 1.
It's 0.4.
So people do become more productive as they eat more,
but this productivity increase is not super large.
Now, there's some others.
There's very few other studies.
But broadly, other studies find very similar results.
What do they find?
So here's-- Strauss finds an elasticity of 0.4.
I should say, these are, I think,
farm workers or people doing very physical labor.
So we think, if you look at nutrition increasing
people's productivity, this is really
where you should look at.
If you think you're not strong enough to do certain work,
if you're a farm worker and so on,
that's maybe the maximum effect on productivity
that you might be able to find for at least caloric intake.
There's some experiment by Wolgemuth with Kenyan road
workers where some people were given--
some were given some food and others were given more food.
And you find an elasticity of something like 0.5.
There's, in fact, even a recent RCT
that finds no effect of increasing
caloric intake on productivity in flower plants in Ethiopia.
Why exactly it is we don't quite know.
But I think the main takeaway for this
is the elasticity is clearly below 1.
Now we have, essentially, estimates of two elasticities.
We have an elasticity of increasing income
on caloric intake.
That elasticity is below 1.
We also have an elasticity of increasing caloric intake
on income or productivity.
That's also below 1.
Now once you put these things together,
once we multiply these two elasticities,
we get something like 0.54 times 0.6, which is about 0.3.
What I was telling you, what we really need
is we need to intersect the 45 degree lines from below.
We need a slope of above 1.
But instead, we have a slope of max 0.3.
Now, there's a bit of a question,
for whom does that exactly apply?
But even if you look at different subsamples and types
of people, essentially this elasticity is clearly below 1.
That is to say, we don't think there's
a nutrition poverty trap going on,
at least in that formulation.
And notice that I haven't even talked about the fact
that increased productivity might not even
lead to larger wages.
We looked at productivity here, but it
could be that even if people become more productive,
they're not even paid that much more because the landlord
or whoever, their boss, just pays them the same
or not much more.
So overall, what's the summary?
It's, well, overall, this evidence
suggests that a nutrition poverty trap is unlikely.
And so any policies that you come across
that sort of says, well, the big problem
is that people are not eating enough calories,
is likely misguided.
So if you just say, well, feed people
because if we feed people they will become more productive
and become richer, that's not right.
Now you might say, people are not eating enough,
and therefore we want to help them in the short run
because that's bad if people are starving and so on.
That's, of course, very well warranted.
You might want to do that.
But it's not the case that you can expect the long run
effect of these types of intervention
through giving people more food or more money to eat.
Now, of course, this is not the end of the story.
So far we talked about very much short run effect of nutrition,
of caloric intake.
And as I said, there might be different things going on.
In particular, there could be longer run effects.
This is, I think, what Zion was saying earlier about
there could be improved micronutrient, iron,
et cetera, intake and so on, that if adults
eat better type of food, maybe in a year or two from now
they become more productive, potentially.
Second, I think this is most importantly--
and there's in fact some evidence that suggests that
there could be very high returns--
is child nutrition and more broadly child health.
That could be a very important mechanism through which
a poverty trap could emerge.
And the idea here is you provide a child in the short run
or even like one-time investment, be
that, for example, in utero, when the child is very young,
the child is fed well, or maybe some programs
such as deworming, which improve how much food people can
essentially keep in their body or what
happens to the nutrients that they're eating.
Doing that short run or one-time intervention
is potentially increasing people's capacity
over their entire lifetime.
That is to say, you do a deworming program or a food
program for mothers and children as they're
very young, that might make them healthier,
helps them stay in school, makes them stronger,
helps them learn more in school, and therefore, they
will be more productive for the rest of their lives.
And in fact, that's what [INAUDIBLE]
going to talk about next week.
There is good reason to believe that maybe
these types of investments have much, much higher returns.
And so, therefore, there could be some nutrition or health
poverty trap, in fact, going on, just not
in the way that we had hypothesized
in the first case--
in the first place about nutrition and caloric intake
overall.

Given the existing evidence on the income elasticity of calories, if there were a calorie-based poverty trap, what would we need to find for the effect of increased calorie intake on productivity? If you eat more calories…



… you’ll be much less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat more productive.

… you’ll be much more productive.




You have used 1 of 2 attemptsSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.
11.2
1/1 point (graded)
What does the evidence suggest about the effect among the poor of increased calorie intake on productivity? If you eat more calories...



… you’ll be much less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat more productive.

… you’ll be much more productive.

True or false? A positive feedback loop (a.k.a., virtuous cycle) — e.g., more income today means even more income tomorrow which means even more income the next day, etc. — is sufficient to create a poverty trap.



True

False
correct
Show answer
Submit
You have used 1 of 1 attemptSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.
5.2
1/1 point (graded)
True or false? A negative feedback loop (a.k.a., vicious cycle) — e.g., less income today means even less income tomorrow which means even less income the next day, etc. — is sufficient to create a poverty trap.



True

False
correct