PROFESSOR: Now how much do the poor actually spend on food?
This is from some surveys from the World Bank LMIS
it's called.
It's partially reproduced in Esther and Abhijit's "Economic
Lives Of The Poor" article.
Here you see people living in rural areas with less than $1
a day.
This is all kind of for constant prices.
And you see people's expenditures
on food, alcohol, tobacco, education, health,
entertainment, festivals, and festivals expenditures.
And so now what do you see here now about how much do
the poor spend on food?
When you see this, now here you see people's percentages.
What do you think?

Yeah.
STUDENT: They spend a majority of their income on food.
PROFESSOR: Quite a bit, right.
So something like from ranging from something like 50%
to even 80% in some places.
Do you think that's a lot or not so much or what do we think?
STUDENT: I think it's a lot.
PROFESSOR: Looks like a lot.
Could it be more?

STUDENT: Yeah.
I mean.
PROFESSOR: How could they--
STUDENT: More than 80, I'm not too sure.
But I mean--
PROFESSOR: But take, for example, say, Mexico.
In what way could it be more potentially?
Olivia.
STUDENT: Decrease alcohol and tobacco consumption.
PROFESSOR: You could say maybe alcohol and tobacco could
be reduced.
You could say maybe festivals could be reduced for some.
Entertainment is not very much.
Health is actually not--
I mean, it's substantial but it's not that much either.
Notice that in some places there's also free health
care available.
For example, in Mexico.
Education is quite a bit.
Notice that that's often extras.
That's on top of often free public education.
You could say it could be somewhat higher.
Maybe not that much higher.
Notice that there's also, as you said,
there's quite a bit of variation.
It goes from something like 50% to 80%.
That seems to be at least some choice available
for some people.
Some people seem to want to choose alcohol or tobacco.
Some other people seem to choose festivals and expenditures.
But it seems to be some choice available
for some people at least but maybe not that much.
Now, what could people do now to increase their caloric intake?
So seeing these numbers, what would you say?
What could they do to increase their caloric intake?

One thing we said, you could cut back
on some of the other expenditures.
What else could you do?
Yeah, Samantha.
STUDENT: I know that in the chapter,
it talked about the quality of food
that they were consuming, especially
people opting for better tasting food
rather than just high calorie foods.
So I'm not sure what the makeup of the food is there,
but they could just prioritize high calorie foods
rather than trying to spend money on [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right, exactly.
There's two margins of adjustment potentially.
One would be spend larger share of the income on food.
And there's at least some potential
to cut back some other things, which you might not want to do.
But there's also you could eat different kinds of food.
For example, relatively more nutritious food.
Often delicious food is not that nutritious.
But in principle, you have a choice
between different kinds of food and you can choose
food that's more nutritious.
Now, next we're going to now actually--
so this is just to say, so overall, it
looks like people are spending quite a bit of money on food.
It doesn't seem that they're maximizing caloric intake
overall.
It doesn't seem like they try to eat as much as possible
and cut down everything.
But they spend quite a bit on it.
But maybe there's also different types of food
that they could eat.
Now, how can we test whether--
and this is what you were asking about.
How can we test about whether caloric intake increases
rapidly with income for the very poor?
Well, we can look at three things.
We can look at what people call the cross section.
We just look at across people with different income
and see what is their caloric intake looks like.
Second, we look at these studies that
look at the impact of food subsidies.
Once you make certain food cheaper for some people
and what happens then.
And finally, we're going to look at the impact of cash
transfers.
Let's start with this.
So the first thing that you can do,
and this is a paper by Deaton and Subramanian,
what you can do is you can look at people.
This is in Maharashtra in India in 1983.
You can look at people's log per capita income.
This is outlay, which is really just their expenditures
overall.
And you can plot that against people's log
per capita calories.
Why are we using the log?
Essentially if you use the log, then the slope
is the elasticity.
That's to say if you look at the slope,
the slope tells you if you increase income by 1%,
by how much does caloric intake go up?
This is called an Engel curve because there
was an economist or statistician called
Engel who was obsessed by food.
And so if you plot this curve, you're
going to essentially see something like this.
Notice that the slope is about 0.35.
That is to say if you make people 1% richer
or if you look at a person who is 1% richer per capita,
consumption of calories increases by 0.35%.
Again, we call this an elasticity.
By how much does caloric intake increase as people
become 1% richer?
And this is why we are plotting log as opposed to levels.
Log of these variables on the x-axis.
Log of caloric intake on the y-axis.
And now the slope is an elasticity.
Notice that this is what I was saying before.
We're looking for an elasticity above 1
for there to be a chance of there to be a poverty trap.
Now we have an elasticity of 0.35.
So that's not particularly high.
Notice that the way this graph or this estimation is done,
this doesn't have to be necessarily a straight line.
This could have had any shape.
This is an estimation.
So this could have been very nonlinear and curvy and so on.
But it happens to be very flat.
And it looks like even here for the very poor,
this is the poorest of the poor in Maharashtra,
even there the curve is not particularly steep.
So if there was a nutrition poverty trap,
you would have expected there to be some part in this curve
where things are very steep.
In fact, the curve is relatively flat with a slope
of about 0.35.
Yeah?
STUDENT: It feels like this isn't quite disproving
a nutrition poverty trap.
For example, couldn't this be explained
by if all of these data points were on the very tail of the S
curve and there's only modest gains in productivity?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So you're saying several things.
One is to say where on the S curve are people.
You're exactly right that people might be in steady state
or somewhere else and not quite in the curve
you're looking for.
We expect people to be in different places.
We expect there to be at least a high slope for some people.
But what we find is even among the poorest of the poor, even
among everybody in the middle, we
find no signs of any nonlinear patterns.
We find no sign of there being like--
if you look at even any subsample of people,
nowhere do you find to be a very high slope is to be found.
And therefore, it doesn't seem to be
that there's any sign that there's a steep relationship.
You're exactly right.
There's a question of exactly where
are people and are they in the steady state
versus not and so on.
There's also a question of here we're comparing people
across incomes.
We compare rich people versus poor people.
These are different people.
And it could well be that the richer people
are somewhat different than the poorer people in various ways.
Maybe they care about food more or less.
They have different tastes and so on and so forth.
This is not really quite testing that.
This is sort of a sniff test, if you want, and saying, well,
does it look like there's a very steep slope?
And the answer is not really.
We can [INAUDIBLE] for other types of tests as well.
Yeah?
STUDENT: I'm a little bit confused about the 1%.
So if you spend 50% of your money on food
and then your salary increases and you still spend 50%,
is that a 1% elasticity or a 0% elasticity?
PROFESSOR: So if you--
STUDENT: Like if there's no change in the percent.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So that would be an elasticity of 1.
So if you increase-- if you double your income
and you double your food, then that
would be an elasticity of 1.

And that would be like if you just
did the share that's spend on food stays constant, that's
essentially an elasticity of 1.
And we're looking for elasticity that's larger than 1.
So what we see here is you increase expenditures
by about 1% and consumption of calories only increases
by 0.35%, which is meaning it's about 1/3
of that expenditures goes towards food.
Now, it looks very linear.
Now, notice that they also did another thing they did.
Instead of having the caloric intake here on the y-axis,
they also had overall food expenditures on the y-axis.
And then they find an elasticity of 0.7.
This elasticity is 0.35.
They find about a twice as large an elasticity
for food expenditures.
What do we learn from that?
What does that mean?
What are people doing?

Yeah?
STUDENT: They're buying more expensive food
that doesn't increase their calories as much.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So they increase their food expenditures
by more than their caloric intake.
What does this mean?
They spend more money on food, about 70%
or they spend more money on food, but some of that,
exactly as you say, doesn't go towards increased calories.
But instead they're switching towards more expensive calories
per rupee spent.
So that's to say as people get richer,
they also buy more expensive calories.
And you can see this also here in Deaton
and Subramanian's work.
You see here people's expenditure patterns.
You see people's expenditure shares.
What you see here is the bottom 10%,
and that's a little bit small for you to see,
but maybe the people in the first row can see it.
The bottom 10% and the top 10% of people's income.
And what you see here is essentially
that people are moving from cereals.
If you look at the bottom 10% spends about 46%
of their expenditures on cereals while the top 10%
spend about 31% on cereals.
Richer people spend less money on cereals
but more on things like meat, fruits and vegetables,
and other types of foods as well as dairy.
And what you see here is on the right,
you see the price per calorie.
And if you wanted to just maximize calories, really
what you want to do is you want to eat essentially cereals,
because they're very cheap.
But as people become richer, they move away from cereals
and they buy other stuff.
They buy stuff like meat, dairy, fruits and vegetables.
And even within cereals, people move
towards more expensive cereals away from I think from rice,
I believe.
They move towards rice instead of more coarse cereals.
So the poorest spend about 9% on rice, while if you're richer,
you spend about 11% on rice.
And here you can see essentially the price for these calories.
People move to more expensive foods,
which suggests that people don't seem to be maximizing
caloric intake.
This is not what you expect if there was a nutrition poverty
trap.
If you're trying to maximize how many calories you get and I
give you an additional 100 rupees,
you should eat more calories as much
as you can to get out of the nutrition poverty trap.
But here, instead what people are
doing, they're buying more expensive things,
stuff that tastes better, stuff that's more fun and so on.
Very understandable, but it doesn't seem
they're maximizing the caloric intake overall.
So that's already kind of like a warning flag
that doesn't look like there's a nutrition poverty trap going
on here as people don't seem to be maximizing caloric intake
in the first place.
Yeah?
STUDENT: It seems like it could support the point
from the beginning of class, which
is that even though one component of nutrition
is calories, another component is nutrients.
And so it seems not to negate a nutrition based poverty trap
but instead to support there's not just a calorie
based poverty trap.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's a great point.
So you might say, well, people are eating more meat.
People are eating more fruits and vegetables.
People eating more dairy.
Maybe that has a lot more iron.
Maybe it has a lot of more nutrients, micronutrients
that are helpful that I might not pay off in the short run,
but maybe in the long run that might be really
important for your health.
Maybe it's really important for children in utero
or during childhood.
That has very long run potential effects.
Esther is going to talk about this next week.
But you're exactly right.
So what I'm looking for is a nutrition based poverty trap
based on caloric intake of people just
not having enough to eat.
But then exactly as you say, maybe food quality
or types of food that you eat is really important as well.
We're going to return to that next time.
You're exactly right.