
PROFESSOR: I think Julie was asking earlier about,
well, do we assume that this is the shape of the capacity
if curves looks that way?
What do we need to assume or what kinds of curves
create poverty traps and what kinds of curves do not?
That is to say, what is it here that
creates this type of situation?
What does a capacity curve need to look
like to create such poverty traps or a poverty trap?

Liam?
Yeah.
STUDENT: The beginning part would
need to be underneath the 45 degree lines.
So like, to the left.
PROFESSOR: So we need to be somewhere,
we need to be under, below the 45 degree line.
What if we're always below the 45 degree line?
Is that a poverty trap or not?
If you actually have it here, what if it looks like this?
I guess I already gave it away in the text,
but can you describe what's going on here?

STUDENT: This person reaches the steady state.
If they go any further, there's no more like steady states
available.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
There's only one steady state.
So everybody, if the curve looked like this, everybody,
regardless of where you started, would end up
in this steady state.
Right?
There's no other intersection with the 45 degree line.
So even if you started here, you would go all the way down here.
And if you started down there, you would go this way as well.
So if the curve is all the way below the 45 degree line,
even if it's S-shaped, you're not
going to have a poverty trap.
Similarly, if the curve, the S-shaped part
is all the way above, you're not going
to find a poverty trap either because everybody
will end up here now.
And I encourage you to print out these slides
or try to do that on your tablet or the like.
Try to write out different curves or draw different curves
and try to see, where do people end up?
And convince yourself that this has only one steady state,
everybody ends up in the same place.
There's no poverty trap.
Similarly here, this one only has one steady state.
There's no poverty trap.
Now, in addition, if you had something like this,
if the capacity curve looked something like this, again,
there's no poverty trap.
This is not a concave function.
There's no S-shaped curve here.
Everybody now, regardless of whether you end up here
or whether you start here or whether you start here,
everybody ends up at this steady state.
OK?
So now let me ask again, what do we
need to then assume for our capacity curve
to look like to create a poverty trap?
Yeah.
STUDENT: There must be some section below the 45 degree
line before some section above the 45 degree line.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
We need to essentially intersect the 45 degree line from below.
Notice that what we have here, we
have 2 intersections of the 45 degree line, one from above
and one from below.
And so now we get, essentially, a steady state here
and a steady state here.
And the S-shape helps, essentially,
intersecting the 45 degree line, in this case, 3 times,
and 2 of them are stable, steady states.
One is where the rich people end up
or people who start rich end up here.
People who start poor end up here.
So what we need is we need some S-shaped capacity curve
or something that essentially has some S-shaped pattern
or the like.
And then we need the capacity curve to intersect the 45
degree line from below.
And so crucially, what this requires
is that there needs to be some part here where the capacity
curve is very steep.
That's what we talked about earlier.
It cannot be that the capacity curve is very flat.
If you, for example, get this one here,
where mostly it's essentially very flat,
this is not going to help.
You need some part--
It might be flat at some places, but here, that
needs to be a very steep part of the curve.
And so if it's not the case that we
don't have a steep part of the curve,
or we don't have an S-shaped curve that intersects the 45
degree line from below, then there
is no poverty trap situation going on.
OK?
So I just talked about this already.
If you have a concave relationship,
there's only one steady state, no poverty trap.
If you have the S above the 45 degree line,
no poverty trap, only one steady state.
And if you have the S-shaped part below,
also no poverty trap either.
OK?
Notice that a double feedback loop,
as in like just there being poor nutrition lowers income and low
income means you cannot buy a lot of food,
is not sufficient for their existence of being a poverty
trap.
You have this kind of a feedback loop here either,
but essentially, it seems like the feedback loop is not
strong enough, you're not going to get above this 45 degree
line, and therefore, there is no poverty trap here.
So really, what we need is we need
to have not only a relationship between income and food
and between food and income, and this relationship needs
to be very strong, otherwise, there
is no poverty trap going on.