PROFESSOR: The first part was merely
conceptual or hypothetical in some ways for saying,
for given capacity curve, is there a nutrition poverty
trap or any other poverty trap, and how might we test for it?
The key question is, is there a steep relationship
between income and nutritional intake and between nutritional
intake and low productivity or productivity and income?
So as I said, we're going to test now
for the empirical relationship in two ways.
First, we're going to look at the impact of increased
income on caloric intake.
As people become richer, do they now actually eat more,
and how much more?
Second, we're going to look at the impact of increased
caloric intake on productivity.
As people eat more, do they become more productive
and do they earn more income?
As I said, we need to have both of these relationships
to be strong for there to be a possibility of a nutrition
poverty trap.
OK, so the first question, you might say,
is, well, how much money are actually
people spending on food?
And if there were an S-shaped nutrition productivity
curve, what would we expect the poor to do?
Yeah.
STUDENT: You'd expect a large percent of their income
to go towards food.
And as they earn more, they'd spend more
on food proportionally.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so if there was really this type of trap,
if you're able to go from one steady state to the next
by eating more, you would think that there should
be some people, at least, who would spend a lot of money
on food.
You eat as much as you can to become more productive.
And, in fact, you're going to even optimize your food intake
such that you eat the most nutritious food in some ways,
OK?
And so you would eat as much as you can,
and you would expect first to be a very high share of the food
budget.
And it might be the case that if there's
some unavoidable expenses, for example,
you have, say, clothing or housing
and so on that you need to spend money on anyway that you just
can't avoid--
as you get a little bit richer, if somebody dropped some money
onto you, you would spend most of that money, at least,
on food, exactly as you said.
So suppose, for example, you had a budget
of 20 rupees, which is not very much, which is about $1--
sorry, less than that-- and spend
5 rupees on clothing and housing, and 15 rupees on food.
That's to say, you have to spend some money
on unavoidable expenses.
But everything else would be spent on food.
Yeah.
STUDENT: So is this assuming that there's not
an S-shaped curve for housing?
PROFESSOR: That's a great question.
So you might think that there could be also
a trap coming from housing and so on
and that you spent the money based on that.
I think, for now, let's assume that away
and say that doesn't necessarily exist.
You're exactly right.
There could be some other type of traps going
on, say, in health or other housing,
for that matter, that people spend the money on instead.
For now, we're going to assume there's a nutrition poverty
trap and only a nutrition poverty trap,
but we're going to revisit that later.
Now, suppose you magically got 10 rupees more.
You still have to spend 5 rupees on clothing and housing.
But then you spend essentially everything on food.
And then as you become even richer now,
you have 45 rupees per day.
You spent maybe a little bit more on clothing and housing,
but a little bit more on food and then a little
bit also on other stuff, for example, movies.
Now, what do we find now if you think about how much--
what are the shares that people spend
of their additional income on food and other things?
If you look at the person going from 20 to 30 rupees,
how much does the budget increase for that person?

Yeah.
STUDENT: 10 rupees.
PROFESSOR: And that's percentage?
How much is that?
STUDENT: Yeah, 50%.
PROFESSOR: 50%.
10 out of 20 is 50%.
And how much do their food expenditures increase?
STUDENT: By all of that, 10 rupees.
PROFESSOR: So it goes by 10 rupees.
And how much is that proportionally?
STUDENT: More than 50%.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
It's 10 over 15, which is 66%, I think, right?
So essentially, this person increases--
because there are some unavoidable expenditures
at the beginning, this person has a very stark increase
in their food expenditures as the person becomes richer.
And exactly as you say, they increase their food
expenditures by 66% in response to an increase
of their budget of 50%, which is to say the increase in food
expenditure is disproportionately
or is larger, relatively, compared to the overall budget.
So the share of food expenditure, in fact, goes up.
And then if you go another-- if you go from here, 30 to 45,
now we have another 50% increase in the budget,
which, of course, we made up these numbers that way.
Now you see essentially this flattens off.
Now the increase is only something like 20%.
So now we have a less-than-disproportionate
impact on food expenditures, OK?
So that's to say, there should be some people
who essentially spend a lot of money
on food as much as they can.
And you should see very stark increases
in people's food expenditures as people become richer.
So in this example, you go a 50% increase from 20 to 30.
It leads to a 66% increase in food expenditures.
And so once we divide these two, we call this an elasticity, OK?
The elasticity essentially is a question about,
by what percentage does food expenditure increase as income
increases by 1%, OK?
That's an elasticity.
We essentially say, as we make somebody 1% richer,
by how much do they increase their expenditures
on different things, in this case, on food?
And so now, here, we have a very high elasticity.
The elasticity is now, if you increase people's income by 1%,
they increase their food expenditures by more than 1%,
OK?
Now, if there is a nutrition poverty trap,
this elasticity should be very high for the poor.
We would think it should be above 1, in fact,
for some people, OK?
And that's what we're going to try and test for.