PROFESSOR: The next thing you're going to look at,
and it's is a different way of looking at this,
we're going to look at the impact of food subsidies.
So Jensen and Miller is a famous study that looked at this issue
in a different way.
They searched for what's called a Giffen good--
a good whose consumption increases
when the price increases.
Why are Giffen goods surprising?
Why is that an odd thing?
Yeah.
STUDENT: It doesn't really follow a classic notion
of supply and demand.
PROFESSOR: Mostly demand.
How?
STUDENT: Generally.
PROFESSOR: What is the law of demand?
STUDENT: Demands goes down.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Demand, if you took 1401 or any other econ class,
they will tell you demand curves tend to slope down.
As in if things get more expensive,
you consume less of it.
As in, like, if I increase the price of something,
you're going to demand less of it.
Now, Giffen goods are an exception
to this, where essentially as you increase the price,
people's consumption of it increases.
This is a little bit like a unicorn in economics.
People always had-- this is a conceptual thing
that people thought existed but nobody's ever seen one.
It turns out Jensen and Miller in fact found one,
at least in the study I'm going to show you about.
OK?
Now, as I said, we expect demand curves to slope down.
Now, how is it possible that as a price of a good increases,
people's consumption increases as well?
What must be true or what's going on?
Yeah.
STUDENT: That the higher price is
an indicator of some sort of impressive quality
perhaps, so people are ready to pay that higher
price [INAUDIBLE],, but they also expect that food to be better
[INAUDIBLE].
That price should reflect some of the--
PROFESSOR: Right.
So it could be that there's a signal of quality and so on.
I think this study is trying to abstract from that.
You're exactly right that the price
could be a signal of quality.
What could also go on?
Let me ask differently.
For example, suppose we reduce the price of something
and you eat less of it.
What could be going on as well?
Or can somebody-- somebody know what income and substitution
effects are in economics?
Olivia.
STUDENT: Yeah.
I mean, it could be something like a luxury good.
Like we talked about lobster I know in 1401.
So even if price increases, you're going to consume more
or there's a lack of substitutes.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So essentially, when a price of a good increases,
there's two effects going on.
One is what's called a substitution effect.
You want to consume less of this good
because it has become more expensive
relative to other goods.
OK?
You choose between apples and bananas.
Apples become more expensive.
You're going to choose more bananas compared to apples
just relatively because it's a better deal to eat bananas
compared to apples.
That's a substitution effect.
OK?
The substitution effect is always a negative, in the sense
that as the price increases you want less of it.
But then there's an income effect.
So normal goods have a positive income effect.
You consume more as income goes up.
Inferior goods have a negative income effect.
You consume less as income goes up.
What's going on here potentially is that people become richer,
and now they switch away to other types of goods.
So this would be in the case of rice
or other types of basic food that we just saw--
as people become richer, they choose, essentially,
to eat other types of goods, or as they become poorer
or they eat more of it.
So in this case, for example, here, what we have seen
is, as people become richer, they eat less of, say,
[INAUDIBLE] and so on.
Which is to say, that's an income effect that's negative,
which is people become richer, and now they
switch to other types of goods.
And so, now, here, Giffen goods now
are inferior goods with an income effect
that is so strong that it dominates the substitution
effect.
That is to say, it becomes more expensive
and now you would think people eat less of it.
But now, there's still the negative income effect, which
is to say you consume less as--
right.
So normal goods have positive income effects.
Inferior goods have negative income effects.
So you consume less as income goes up.
Now, if I increase the price of a certain good,
now, essentially, you have less money
available, and for an inferior good which has negative income
effects, having less money available
leads people to eat more of it.
OK?
And so, that's to say, there might
be situations where people--
certain things become cheaper.
So if I make a certain good cheaper for you,
you would think that you should eat more of it.
But now, by making certain goods cheaper for you,
you also become richer.
You can afford more overall because you
have to spend less money on that good.
Now, essentially, as you feel richer,
you substitute to other types of goods.
And so, now, if you start eating shrimp instead of rice,
if I make the price of rice cheaper for you,
you might eat actually less rice despite the price
of rice going down.
Does that make sense?
So I'm going to show this in a specific context.
So the goods that people look at in China was rice,
and they found that in cities where the price of rice
is higher, people consume more rice.
And they argue that, well, really should see the opposite.
But it seems to be that if the price goes up,
people actually consume more of it.
Now, why is that not conclusive?
I think for two reasons.
One could be that that's for supply reasons.
In rich cities, maybe people just
charge higher prices and people eat more there anyway.
Or it could be that perhaps prices
are a quality signal in some ways,
and people perceive the quality of rice
to be higher when the price is higher.
So now, what they do is they do an RCT to look at this more
specifically.
So they have a sample of households in Hunan in China,
and they randomly choose a subsample of them.
They give people vouchers to reduce the price of rice
to this random subsample for more than a month's supply.
They make sure that the households do not exchange
or trade these vouchers.
So otherwise, you just give people money.
And then, after six months, they ask household detailed
questions about their consumption of rice, wheat,
and other stuff.
OK?
So now, what have we done here-- or what
have they done in this study-- they reduced the price of rice.
And now, the substitution effect should
say people should be eating more rice.
Rice becomes cheap, therefore it's a better deal
to buy rice-- you should eat more rice.
But the income effect might go the other way.
You reduce the price of rice.
People become richer relatively--
they have more money available to buy things.
And so, now, they might switch to other types of goods.
And that's the income effect going the other way
potentially.
And what this test is now, they kind of look at,
well, is the income effect sufficiently large to overcome
the substitution effect?
And that's exactly what they find.
So when the price of rice decreases
by 10% due to these vouchers that people are given,
rice consumption decreases by 2.5%,
and the elasticity is in fact negative.
That's to say, Jensen and Miller found a Giffen good.
That is to say, households consume more now
of other goods.
So households with a subsidy report
increased consumption of seafood and maybe meat.
And so, what's happening here is that people
get a subsidy on rice, they spend less money on rice
overall, and they use this extra money to not spend it on rice,
but rather they spend it on other types of goods,
including seafood and meat.
OK?
And that's the definition of a Giffen good.
Now, why does this matter here?
Well, what we're interested in is the income effect.
We're interested in what happens as people become richer.
Do they spend more money on nutrition?
And what in fact we see is, well, it
doesn't seem to be the case.
And in fact, for some goods, not only is the elasticity not
above one, but in fact it might even be negative.
Yeah.
STUDENT: So this-- the rice example
is proving that if the price of a product
increases the demand doesn't increase.
But Giffen good is when the price increase the demand also
increases.
So I don't know why this one is a Giffen good.
PROFESSOR: So the price is going down,
and then now people are in fact eating less of it.
So what people are doing--
not only are they not increasing their consumption of rice,
but in fact they're eating less.
STUDENT: But isn't the definition of Giffen
good is when price increase the amount--
PROFESSOR: Ah.
Sorry.
You can-- this is both directions.
So if the price-- so sorry.
I defined it the other way around,
and maybe that's confusing.
So what I wrote here is as the price increases,
consumption increases.
Conversely, as the price decreases,
consumption decreases.
That's supposed to be equivalent.
Yeah.
So here, in this case, we find that through the subsidy
the price decreased, and people now
decreased their consumption.
Now, that's interesting for two reasons.
One is that there must be essentially a negative income
effect.
As in, as people become richer, they substitute away from rice
to other things.
And second, it tells you something
about targeted subsidies.
So if you want to do nutrition policy and so on,
many countries have food price subsidies
to encourage greater nutrition.
That is to say, for example, India
has a national subsidy for rice and rice-consuming regions.
Now, what do the results from Jensen and Miller
suggest for such policies?
What are these policies doing now?

Yeah.
STUDENT: They're actually not affected at all.
[INAUDIBLE] to increase the consumption of rice [INAUDIBLE]
actually decreasing.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if it's really the case, and if you're
sort of in this Jensen and Miller world,
then not only are we not doing very much,
but in fact it might even be counterproductive.
As in to say, if households consume less rice and more
shrimp, but shrimp are not very nutritious per dollar spent,
the effect on caloric consumption of subsidizing rice
might not be large, and it may even be negative.
OK?
And this is in fact what Jensen and Miller found in Hunan.
This is not only the case for calories but also
for other nutrients.
Going back to your point, maybe people
are eating worse nutrients potentially.
And so, we want to be very careful
with these types of subsidies.
In addition, what do we learn from about the effect of income
on caloric consumption in this population?
Well, it must be negative.
People are now actually eating--
since shrimp are worse calories compared to rice, people
eating less rice, more shrimp.
And now, people, actually as they become richer,
they eat fewer calories.
OK?
So that's to say, that's another sort
of red flag for a theory of the nutrition poverty trap.
As we increase people's income, people
don't seem to be eating more nutrition.
Now, you might say, wait a minute.
Didn't you just show me that the Engel curves are positive
previously?
Right?
Previously, I showed you-- let me go back to this.
Previously, I showed you the Engel curves for India.
And I showed you, as people become richer,
people eat more calories.
And the slope was something like 0.35.
Which is to say, if you gave people 10% more income,
you should see a 3.5 increase in people's caloric intake.
Now, I'm showing you a different study in India and China
that says, in fact, look, this income elasticity
might in fact be negative.
So how are these things consistent?
What could be going on?

Let me ask differently.
What comparisons are we making here versus what comparisons
did we make previously?

This is within and across people.

STUDENT: Within.
PROFESSOR: It's sort of within in some sense.
Some people-- I'm randomizing some people into subs.
It's across people, but I'm subsidizing
some people versus others.
But I'm holding constant everything else.
You're randomizing people to be very similar treatment
and control, and then we change people's food prices
in some ways and look at what happens.
So it's holding constant ideally everything else.
Well, in the previous graphs that I
showed you was across people.
We're comparing poor versus rich people,
and that slope could be very different from a slope
that we find here.
Notice that in addition, of course, also
very different settings.
This is India versus China.
And it could also, in fact, in another setting,
in Gansu Province, Jensen and Miller
did not find evidence of a Giffen good.
That's to say that this elasticity might be positive,
but in some cases it could be negative,
in some cases it could not.