PROFESSOR: Now, you have read chapters 1 and 2 of Poor
Economics, and you have come across, hopefully, the story of
[INAUDIBLE].
What is the story of this person,
and what is the idea of the nutrition-based poverty
trap that he talks about?

Lucas?
STUDENT: I think kind of the main idea
is like he doesn't have enough money for food
and then because he doesn't get proper nourishment,
he gets weaker and he can't work,
and then, again, he can't get food.
He's even weaker.
He can work even less, and just like--
PROFESSOR: Right.
Exactly.
That's very similar to the story of Abu
that we had in the first lecture.
Now, talking about nutrition specifically,
you're exactly right.
He doesn't have work.
Why does he not have work, or what's his explanation?
STUDENT: I'm not sure what it was initially,
but he becomes too weak to do most manual labor.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Anybody remember why he is not working?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Was he too old?
PROFESSOR: I don't think so, but possibly.
STUDENT: He said he was depressed.
PROFESSOR: He was also depressed,
and what was going on with wages?
There was some theory about wages
or some ideas about wages.
What did he say about wages?
Evan?
STUDENT: They said that all the landowners fired
a lot of the workers due to price inflation,
and so he couldn't get a construction
job because he was too old.
PROFESSOR: I see.
STUDENT: And he kind of kept losing money
and didn't want to pay [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Right.
And in part, I think the wages were also-- some of the things
that he could do, the wages were too low
for him to have sufficiently much food.
Because he didn't have a job.
He was too old to qualify for certain jobs,
but then, some jobs that he could potentially do
were just not enough for him to eat sufficiently,
and therefore, he was weak, and therefore, he
couldn't work well, and so on.
So the idea is very much like with your wage,
with the work that you do, you earn money,
and with that money, you can buy food.
Food gives you strength, and that
allows you to get wages, OK?
That's very much like a cycle that he describes.
He doesn't have well-paid work.
Therefore, he doesn't make enough money.
Because he doesn't have money to buy food,
he doesn't eat enough, and because he doesn't eat enough,
he's weak and he cannot find work.
So he's sort of trapped in this cycle
of low caloric intake, of low food intake,
and low productivity.
And the idea is that, well, if you fix one of the two things--
if you gave him some money or if you had some land, for example,
things would be different.
How might things be different if you had land?
Suppose you had like a piece of land
that he could use for various things.
How would that change his life?
Olivia?
STUDENT: So like we had seen in the other story
I think two weeks ago-- you know,
like the guy who planted the jackfruit tree.
If he could do something like that,
that would give him additional income.
If he was already able to work on top of that,
it would help [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So land could help him, or if you were rich in other ways,
if he had inherited income or if he just
had some money available.
Otherwise, he could rent the land
or he could grow some things on this land.
Potentially, of course, maybe that would take a while,
but maybe he could just rent out the land
and get some income from that.
Then he would have enough income to buy food,
so he would eat more, and then he would be more productive,
and then maybe he would find some other jobs as well.
So you would be able to do work and afford doing the work
because he would have more caloric intake
that he wouldn't be able to do if he didn't have land,
for instance.
So there's a relationship between income today--
how much the person earns today--
or income tomorrow or maybe next week, very much in the short
run.
Similarly, this could be also related
to the wage level or the ability of the poorest people to work.
This is what we just talked about.
If you don't have land, for example,
if you're just very poor, you just
don't earn enough for a given wage,
if wages are very low, to eat sufficiently many calories,
and therefore, the people might be less productive,
and then they will not be hired because they are not
productive to start with, in contrast to somebody who
is richer who perhaps has land or other resources
available to them.
Now, what we're going to do is we're
going to try to analyze this more rigorously in some ways
and trying to take this argument very seriously
and trying to say, well, what are, in fact, the conditions
that we can write down that lead to such a poverty trap?
And the idea that we're going to use or the concept
that we're going to use is what's
called the capacity curve that I have a version of which I
have drawn out here.
What is the capacity curve?
What does it show?
Yeah?
STUDENT: I guess it shows the relationship between income
and your ability to work--
I guess the steep slope kind of showing how a certain income is
most optimal.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Let's start with what it shows.
Exactly right.
You said it's a relationship between income on the x-axis.
This could be past or current income.
Let's say it's current income.
And work capacity on the y-axis, which is like how much can you
work, which would be like productivity
or, how much can you produce if I hired you as a worker?
So what would be your output be if you
worked on my farm or anywhere else as a worker, OK?
And so the idea is that if you have more income,
that'll allow you to increase your productivity,
and the mechanism is, of course, increased nutrition, OK?
We talked about this already.
And so now, what explains the shape of this curve?
Why does it look the way it does?

That's my hypothesis, but Rodrigo, yes?
STUDENT: Yeah.
So I guess it's kind of showing the poverty
trap because if you make low income, you can't work,
so therefore, you can't make as much income,
so you're sort of trapped on the left side.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
We're going to talk about the poverty trap in a second,
but let's talk about the shape first.
Why is it flat to start with, and why does it
get steeper later?
What is the idea of that?
STUDENT: I guess as it gets-- as you get more income,
you're able to afford more food, so you can get more nourished
and therefore be more productive.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
As you get more income, you get more food
and therefore become more productive.
That explains why the curve is upward sloping.
Now, what explains why it's first flat and then gets
steeper?
Julie?
STUDENT: So I think the first part is probably flat
because even at your poorest, you would probably
take whatever amount of your income
you needed to not be truly starving.
So I think that's why it doesn't go
even lower at the bottom left.
And then at the top right where it's flat again,
I think is because once you have enough money
to eat however you like, there would be no reason to eat more.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So at the left, you're saying it's somewhat flat
because if you're very poor, you're
going to just spend almost all of your money on food,
and if you get a little bit richer,
maybe reduce the money that you spend on food,
so you're not going to actually get much more productive.
And you're saying on the right as you get really rich,
at some point there's like only so much you can eat
and perhaps then it also flattens out.
Angela?
STUDENT: So there seem to be two points of inflection
or three parts in which it is divided.
So the first part, whether you earn very little or a bit more
doesn't really change because either way,
you're not going to get many calories in.
So basically, your capacity will decrease
by one by a very increasing rate every single additional units
you have.
[INAUDIBLE] increasing returns because there's
[INAUDIBLE] where really that is where the difference is made,
so that's where the [INAUDIBLE] the person who
eats sufficiently to produce.
And then there seems to be a part where it kind of flattens
because your productivity is not going to be incredibly much
impacted whether you eat 2,000 calories or 2,100, 200
[INAUDIBLE] The difference is way more marginal than it would
be for that [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Right.
So let me summarize this.
So essentially, there's a biological explanation
as well, in the sense that you say,
once you have very little food and you eat a little bit more,
it's not going to help you very much
to be more productive because your body is very weak.
You just need the calories to survive.
If you have more money and buy more food,
it would just not increase your work capacity very much,
even if you increase your caloric intake by some.
There's a question about how much
are people actually increasing their caloric intake.
[INAUDIBLE] needs to say the body just needs
these calories to survive.
You're not going to be able to work productively.
But at some point, you reach this level
where additional calories make you stronger.
You're better to work hard and so on.
That's when the curve gets very steep.
But at some point, that again flattens off
because at some point, there's only so much you can eat.
Think of this as like having one meal per day,
two meals per day, three meals per day.
And at some point, once you have three meals per day,
it's not going to get any more and going
to be more productive by having a fourth or fifth meal.
But going from meal one to meal two
or to meal three of the day, you might
increase your productivity by quite a bit.
So this is very much this idea.
The first few calories are used by your body just to survive.
They do not make you stronger.
But when you start eating enough to survive,
the next calories give you strength.
And so the idea then is depending
on how rich you are-- so [INAUDIBLE],, for that matter,
who's very poor, may not have enough to eat
to be very productive.
But if he could eat more-- if he were richer--
he would eat more, and he would be more productive.
That is essentially his story.
Does that make sense?

Now, why might the curve have just depicted shape?
We already talked about this.
Work capacity is severely impeded
at low levels of income.
It does just not matter whether you're like really, really poor
or just somewhat poor.
Maybe it just doesn't change very much in your productivity.
So additional income makes a little difference
at low income levels.
But then there's a stark increase
in the work capacity at immediate income level,
and then at some point, there's only
small, small additional effects of additional incomes
at higher level.
That's what we just talked about, OK?