
PROFESSOR: Can anybody think of some problems here?
What are some downsides, potentially, of these accounts?
So we're saying great, people on average save more.
That's terrific.
Everybody should get these accounts.
We should offer them or require everybody
to have these accounts now.
Any thoughts on that policy?

Yeah?
STUDENT: I mean, it helps to save,
but it doesn't really help for unexpected shocks.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so there's one thing is it's
very rigid in the sense that if you have an unexpected shock,
you tied your hands right now.
So in the case of our friend here, [INAUDIBLE],, possibly,
if there was some other shock, some other ship
were coming and trying to conquer them or whatever
or steal stuff from them, he would
have been stuck at the mast, and his sailors
would not be able to listen or hear him at all.
So, in some sense, if you have unexpected shocks happening,
hard commitment devices are not a good idea
because now you're very inflexible.
In this case, I guess, if you have your money stuck in this
treatment, now you just cannot get the money until Christmas
Day, and then you might not be able to pay for your health
or other types of expenses.
Any other idea why it's bad?
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: It's pretty vulnerable to financial risk.
So if there's crazy inflation in that time, [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: I see, so if you think it's a bad--
so there's some interest, but I think the interest is not high.
So if just saving becomes a bad idea for whatever reason,
again, you can't take out the money-- sort
of a different form of a shock.
What about self-control issues?
What if you have really, really bad self-control issues
and you have put in money into this account?
So one thing I haven't told you for these accounts-- often,
for ethical reasons in particular in these studies,
but in general, also, in these types of accounts,
if you really come and want the money
you can take out the money often at some fee.
So it's actually not that fixed.
And so now, in your case, I guess
if you have health issues or other types of problems,
you can get the money out, but you have to pay the fee,
and that's kind of bad.
But if you also have really, really
bad self-control problems, you can also get the money out,
but again, you have to pay this fee.
Now notice that in that situation,
then, you have not saved until Christmas for the presents
for your children and so on.
And you have paid the fee of, say, 10% or 20%
or other large fee that, essentially, you
have to take out.
So then you're worse off than you
would have been if you just never even used
this account in the first place.
So for people who have lots of shocks or people
have really bad self-control problems
and for the unforeseen self-control problems,
this type of account might actually be not good for them.
In fact, they might be bad for them.
And there's a very nice study by [INAUDIBLE] John
that sort of does exactly that.
So for a lot of these commitment devices--
and this is similar to the commitment
device that described to you with my friend in the office--
people have great intentions.
They say, oh, I really want to do this.
I have great plans of writing my paper.
I have great plans for doing my problem sets.
I have great plans of studying and so on.
They often follow through or don't follow through
with these plans, even if they have commitment devices chosen
for them.
So in this case here--
and so this is what people refer to as partial naivety.
That's a bit of a jargon here, but essentially,
people know they have self-control problems,
therefore, they choose the commitment device.
But the self-control problems turn out
to be a lot worse than they thought.
They thought, OK, paying $100 to this other type of organization
and so on would be enough to sort of discipline
their behavior.
But then, actually, it's not strong enough.
People do misbehave anyway.
And then, essentially, you haven't written the paper
at the end.
Suppose my friend were actually following
through with this whole plan, was stricter on me.
Then, I haven't written the paper,
plus I have to pay $100 to this organization
that I don't want to pay money to.
So I'm worse off than if I hadn't ever used
this commitment device before.
And that's what people mean by partially naive.
People are naive or partially--
they understand that they have self-control problems,
but partially, they're also naive.
So this is a field experiment in the Philippines--
again, very similar to the experiment
in which the seed treatment took place where, again, there's
a positive effect of offering the commitment
contract on savings.
So if you look at just the overall group, treatment group
overall and control group overall,
the treatment group does save more than the control group,
as I just showed you in the previous experiment.
But there's about half of the people who have a commitment
contract, who've chosen a commitment contract,
actually default early.
They essentially say, oh, I said I'm
going to only put in the money until Christmas,
but then, in November, at some point,
they say I really need the money.
They pay a penalty and take the money out early.
So they don't reach the goal and they pay the penalty.
And those people are actually worse off
than they would have been if they never even had been
offered this commitment contract because it
didn't reach their goal and they paid the penalty.
Does that makes sense?
Any questions on this?
So now you might say, well, then, the key
challenge essentially-- and this is
sort of where the literature is right now,
I think, is you need to find some ways of offering
commitment devices to people for whom they're helpful.
So some people clearly benefit in some situations.
For some people, these commitment devices are great.
They work well.
Maybe they work well for you, maybe because your friends
are strict.
But for others, they're not working.
So it would be useful to figure out,
can we target people properly, in a sense?
For some people, it works.
And for others, it doesn't.
And maybe we can figure out how to target these properly.
Or maybe more flexible commitment devices could help.
Maybe the problem is that the commitment devices
are very strict.
They have very harsh penalties.
I have to pay 10% or 20% of my savings,
and that's very strict, and that's a lot of monetary fees.
So maybe we have more flexible commitment accounts
that could be helpful.