
PROFESSOR: What is the exception to that sort of example?
So I was saying, most people should probably save.
But why might that not be even feasible?
Angela?

STUDENT: Saving isn't all that easy in general, in the sense
that we're subject to many temptations.
And if we don't have the structures helping
us to save, like 401(k) accounts and things like that,
it's very hard to make the decision to save every day.
Or always the same time-inconsistent
preferences [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Right.
So now, there's two different things
I want to distinguish here.
One is about, is it efficient to say,
should the person save overall?
And the argument about people being perhaps too poor
is, in some sense, a reason about,
maybe that person shouldn't save, at least in some cases.
I'm going to return to that in a second.
You are saying, then, well, even if a person would like,
should probably save, or it'd be good for them to save
and they would like to save, they
might not be able to follow through with their plans.
And then we might want to distinguish two types of cases
here.
One is external reasons, external to the person
in some ways-- in a sense, to the household.
That's to say, I might not have a certain savings account.
I might not be--
like, if I paid monthly, for example,
it might be much easier to save than if I
paid daily, and so on.
These are external reasons, potentially.
And then, there are internal reasons that you mentioned,
which is about self-control, I believe.
Can you say more about that?
STUDENT: So it's very--

it's always the same reason we discussed,
that our preferences are kind of inconsistent between today
and tomorrow.
So today, I might value--
I might postpone my consumption not as easily to tomorrow
as I should.
So I'm not inclined to say today because buying something today
seems more appealing.
And it's very hard to plan.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So I might, in principle, say, I really want to save.
I think it's important.
I agree with all of these reasons.
And I have to pay for certain things,
and I worry about shocks and so on.
So I have great plans of saving every day.
But then, in many situations, then,
temptations or other types of things
arise where, essentially, I could purchase a little bit
of this type of good.
Or I could buy some snacks for my children
that really want them.
Or maybe I would like to splurge on some other expenses.
Maybe I would like to drink or smoke or the like.
And then it might be hard to resist that temptation.
STUDENT: Yeah, like, for example, [INAUDIBLE]
is the big example that's given because it would
be so easy to cut on that.
And yet, people are not necessarily ready to do that.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So it's tempting to think that it might
be easy to cut down on it.
But perhaps, if the little tea that you have on a given day
is the one joy that people have in their life,
it might be very hard to actually cut down on it.
But empirically, it seems to be hard.
So these are self-control problems, yeah?
STUDENT: Yeah.
And it's so-- I mean, it's the same as for us.
Like, I have my coffee every day.
And I'm sure I would make a really good investment not
having my coffee every day, but I would be miserable.
So it's, like, everyone.
PROFESSOR: Correct.
So I think [INAUDIBLE] exactly.
To be very clear, this might affect anybody.
These are self-control problems.
Let me go back to the "efficient to save" in a second.
But so there's external reasons to save,
which are reasons of lack of savings accounts.
And many people might not have bank accounts.
I'm going to talk about that in a second.
Let me just [INAUDIBLE] talk about that.
So many people, the poor, don't have bank accounts.
Why is that?

Can't I just go to the bank and get a bank account?
What's the problem?
Rodrigo, yeah?
STUDENT: Yeah.
It might have too high of fees to either open an account
or do things like withdraw.
PROFESSOR: The fees are often high and relatively high.
So if I want to go to the bank and I have $10
and want to deposit them at the bank, and the bank tells me
it's $20 to open an account, then that defeats the purpose.
But now, why are the fees relatively
high for the poor in terms of as a fraction
of the income or a fraction of what they want to invest?
Why is that?
STUDENT: I think it's, like, mostly industry
costs of opening an account.
Regardless of how big the account is, it's constant.
So like, unless you invest--
PROFESSOR: Like, can you give one
example of an administrative cost that happens to anybody?
Suppose I go to the bank, and I want to open an account.
What needs to happen?

So this is more for traditional banking.
I have to go, I have to talk to some person who's going
to maybe check my records.
Maybe they're just going to set up the account,
explain it to me, and so on.
This changes a little bit with digital banking
in terms of in online banking and so on
or through the phone and et cetera,
where you don't necessarily need, actually,
a person dealing with you.
But in a traditional bank, if you go to the bank
and want to open an account, some person--
you will take up some person's time.
And that's pretty much fixed, regardless of
whether you're going to deposit $1,000, $5,
or, like, $1 million.
Now, maybe if you have $1 million, then
maybe they'd give you more time.
But there's at least some fixed cost
that the bank has to pay, essentially,
or to exert per customer.
And if that's fixed, then relatively,
compared to the low-income person's income,
that's a lot of money.
And, therefore, fees are very high.
And, therefore, it's hard to have a bank account.
Were you saying the same?
Yeah, OK.
So that's what we have here-- fixed costs of opening
bank accounts, et cetera.
And then saving at home, then, at the same time,
might have a very low return-- in particular,
if inflation is very high.
If inflation is something like 10%, 20%, 30%, or even higher,
if you just leave your money at home for a year,
then in a year from now, the money will be just worth less.
So you have even a negative as the real rate
of return on your savings.
And so then that would be an external reason not to save.
And I was also saying there's internal reasons not to save.
There's self-control issues, as we just discussed,
which is the idea that people really would like to save.
They would like to have great plans of,
every day, I'm going to save a certain amount of money
or a fraction of my income or the like.
But then, once the future arrives,
then they have trouble following through.
And we're going to talk about that a bit as well.
There's also spouse-family control issues.
What is that?

Yes, [INAUDIBLE]?
STUDENT: This is more of a guess.
But, like, in reading, they talk about--

I guess I remember more of the solution side, which
is giving control to the mother in the household for control.

PROFESSOR: So the important question--
like, who has the control over money?
But suppose I wanted to save at home.
And I have many people in my household,
including my parents-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
my parents, my uncle, and so on.
And I have all this money lying around in my house.
What happens then?
Yes, Evan?
STUDENT: They can use the money for stuff
that they want or need.
Or you have control of the money, and it's--
they're your family.
You care about them.
So money that you are [INAUDIBLE] saving with,
you might just spend it on them.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So you have to say no to a lot of requests, potentially.
There might be some emergency going on in the household
or maybe among the neighbors and so on.
There might be just--
your uncle wants to buy new shoes.
And then I have some money lying around.
I could help with that.
It's very hard to say no to your friends and family or spouse,
for that matter, for these types of requests.
And so now, if you have your money lying around at home,
that's much more difficult to say no to,
compared to if you have it at a bank-- in particular,
in an account that you can't actually access easily.
So that's spousal control issues.
I have another-- yeah?
STUDENT: Sorry.
Do we just kind of embed it in the self-control, too?
PROFESSOR: Correct, correct.
So self-control would-- the distinction is kind of fluid,
but essentially, self-control would be like,
I'm tempted to buy a new good.
Or I'm tempted to drink or smoke or overindulge in sweets
or other types of things.
That's, like, for myself, so my own consumption,
while the spousal control is more about being
able to say no to others.
But there's also a self-control issue related to that.
For example, suppose your children
ask you for sweets every day, and they
keep nagging you and so on.
And then it's easy.
And you have to control yourself to say no because you think
it's just not in the budget or you're just not
able to afford that.
That's, in some sense--
it's a little bit in between.
It's a family control issue in some sense,
but, of course, you could say no.
And then the self-control issue is about saying yes versus no
and giving in when people keep nagging you over time.
Does that make sense?
OK.
Now, what I have at the beginning, still--
and I want to talk a little bit about--
is, it efficient to save?
So why could it be efficient not to save?
And I have this here, which is to say,
if you expect the future to be better than the present,
not saving much might be efficient.
What do I mean by this?
For example, for all of you right now,
presumably, your income is not very high,
at least for most of you.
Unless you are doing other jobs or other work
or other types of investments that you might have.
So should you save right now?

Or who of you is currently saving quite a bit, you think?

So what would economics say about, should you save
or not save?

Yeah?
STUDENT: I mean, so I've got a Roth IRA, which
is-- if people don't know, it's a super high-return savings
account that's really good when you're young.
But if I wasn't, if it was just sitting in a checking account,
it wouldn't really be doing anything [INAUDIBLE]
spend it that way.
So it's just kind of--
that's an opportunity.
PROFESSOR: So if you have a very high-return investment
opportunity-- that's why I said not saving much
might be efficient.
It might be there's a really high-savings opportunity
that you can use, and especially if you start early,
maybe that compounds over time and will
be a lot in the future.
That's a very reasonable reason to save now.
Anybody want to argue why one shouldn't
save very much-- in particular, if one
doesn't have a lot of high-return opportunities?
Yes, Angela?
STUDENT: I'd say that we're getting an education,
so hopefully, we'll make more money in the future.
So we'll have an opportunity to save [INAUDIBLE]..
And so it makes sense right now, for example, to come to MIT
and spend the money rather than save it because we'll
make more money in the future.
And so it makes sense to [INAUDIBLE]..
So right now, it's kind of a time investment.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So this is getting back to what I was saying earlier, coming
back here--
life cycle of consumption and income.
A lot of savings is essentially about equalizing consumption
across time, saving and borrowing.
Which is to say, suppose you're making, right now,
a lot of money, but you know you will not earn a lot of money
in the future.
Then it's very reasonable to save so you can essentially
smooth out-- you can have equal consumption over time, roughly.
But for you guys, overall, currently, I
think mostly it's the opposite.
I hope we're educating you well and you
will have lots of opportunities to make money in the future.
So on average, at least most of you
will make a lot more money in, say, five years from now
or 10 years from now than you make right now.
Right?
And so that means, essentially, that, if anything,
you should probably borrow money.
Now, don't blame me for overborrowing if you do that.
But in principle, you could say, you could smooth out
consumption by essentially borrowing
some money from the future, if that's easy to do,
and spend more money now than you actually
earn at the moment, such that, overall,
your overall expenditures or consumption
will be roughly equal.
OK?
Does that make sense?
OK.
So for some people in particular,
if you expect to be very rich in the future
or much richer than in the present,
not saving might be efficient.
For which country did that at least used
to be the case quite a bit in last few decades?

Which countries grew a lot in the last few decades?

STUDENT: I think the Middle East.
STUDENT: China [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: China in particular.
Yes, exactly.
And so in China, you had-- what is the savings rate in China?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Very high, actually.
So China, in some sense, sort of defies this example
that I was telling you, in some ways.
We might say, well, perhaps China
was growing a lot precisely because people
are saving a lot--
but conditional on growing as much as China did.
It's not obvious that our economists would say, in fact,
people shouldn't necessarily save
as much as they did because the future will
be higher income in any case.
We might return to that in the future.
And so a lack of income, we talked a little bit
about already, as well, as to say being poor per se
should not matter for the decision
to save because the tradeoff here
is between today and tomorrow that
exists at each income level.
Now, the exception-- and this is--
I think I haven't mentioned this before--
is, some people are so poor that they need all the money they
have to survive today, right?
If you just have no money at all right
now, if you don't have any income or other types
of sources-- you have very little income available-- then
it doesn't make sense to say-- if you starve
and have money in your bank account, that's surely not
optimal.
So if you're really, really poor and have just nothing,
then saving becomes extremely hard
because you might essentially need all the money
to be above subsistence level.