PROFESSOR: All right, so let me get started.
This is lecture number nine about savings,
and what are we going to talk about today?
We're going to talk about why do people save
or why should they save or why do they not save.
we're going to then have a look at what
are the existing ways in which many of the poorer people
save overall.
And then I'm going to tell you about three broad ways in which
we're trying to look at ways in which people
have tried to increase savings among the poor in various ways.
One of them is providing people just simple access to saving.
That's what I have here in number four.
Second is about commitment savings, providing people
with lock boxes or ways, essentially,
where they can lock away their savings
they don't have access to.
And that helps them perhaps save more.
And the last one is we're going to look
at what's called savings monitors, which
is the idea that you can enlist somebody else who might sort
of monitor you and what you're doing,
and that might help you save more or follow through
with your savings plans.
OK, but let me first start very simply with a simple question.
Why do people save, and why is it
a good idea to save for at least some of them?
Yeah, Evan.
STUDENT: People save [INAUDIBLE] purchases,
things that they otherwise couldn't
buy [INAUDIBLE] protection against, like, the [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Let me start with the first thing you said.
People save because they have potentially lumpy or big
expenses they might not be able to afford
with their sort of daily, weekly, or monthly income.
Would you have an example for that?
STUDENT: Like a house.
PROFESSOR: A house.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] a big [INAUDIBLE] school
or something.
PROFESSOR: House, car, paying for kids' schools.
Any other examples?
This is all great.

Yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, like in the reading,
they talk about saving just to build a whole home,
like, room by room.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, yeah.
So, exactly.
But you can--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Hm?
Yeah.
So--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
That's what people do brick by brick,
essentially, room by room.
We're going to get to that about kind
of what are people doing in practice,
how are they going to achieve it.
Now, but let's first talk about what
are the motivations, the underlying reasons
why that is, and then get back to what you just said.
So, I was asking about what are other sort
of lumpy expenditures, big expenditures,
that people might save for.
I think Evan was already saying house, school fees, and so on.
Any other examples?
Yeah, Jack.
STUDENT: Emergencies.
Like, medical or other.
PROFESSOR: Emergencies, yes.
Exactly.
So-- and why is that helpful or useful to save for emergencies?
STUDENT: Because you may not know when those occur.
So, having money on the side can help you pay for that.
So you don't have to sell other assets.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so one--
so, think about, for example, health emergencies
that might occur.
What are the reasons why now health savings might be useful?
One reason is, you know, while you have some expenses that
come up, you might just not simply be able to pay for them.
So, like, say somebody needs an operation.
They need to go to the hospital, and that
costs money in some cases.
Now you might just not be able to pay for it overall
and then just not get the adequate health treatment
that you're looking for.
Suppose you could actually pay for it.
You know, suppose you just take, then,
all of your income on a certain day or a certain week or month
and paid for those health expenditures.
What is the issue with that?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess then if there's any other daily needs
that you have for food and things like that,
then you don't have money for that.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
And what is sort of the term that economists use for that,
or what's the--
so, consumption would go down a lot in that week or month
and so on because you just have to use all of your money
to pay for those expenditures or for health
expenditure, other shocks that you might have.
So your consumption would go down a lot,
and people don't like that.
And what do economists call this?
Anybody?
Yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] like, income effect.
PROFESSOR: It's an income--
it's not quite an income effect.
It's like your income--
your available income then goes down
a lot or, like, whatever you consume in
that period goes down a lot.
And so you have huge variation in income.
And so people like to avoid that overall.
People refer to that as consumption smoothing.
This is the idea that you want to avoid large variation
in consumption over time.
And sort of savings can help deal with shocks
as was just said.
So, that's the idea that if I have an extra dollar that I
could consume right now or I could save it,
the idea is then if in a time where
I have a really bad shock, my available consumption
will go down a lot.
And then that state of the world and that time period
is going to be a lot more valuable for me
to have this extra dollar than it is right now when
I'm doing well overall.
OK, so there's, like, good times, and there's bad times.
And the idea is in bad times, when I don't have income
or when I have bad shocks and so on, then having an extra dollar
is more valuable.
I value that extra dollar more because it's
different from, like, not eating versus eating.
Versus right now, if I have an extra dollar or rupee,
for that matter, then it doesn't matter
so much whether I have an extra dollar because I have enough
to eat and so on for basic necessities anyway.
So that's consumption smoothing.
You want to avoid large variation
in consumption over time.
And so savings, having some savings in particular,
if I haven't purchased insurance products
or if I don't have access to insurance products,
just saving myself will be very helpful for that.
Economists also call that precautionary savings
in some settings.
Any other suggestions?
Yeah, Lucas.
STUDENT: If you have kind of a known capital
cost in the future for running your business--
so if you're a farmer, like, buying seeds
or buying fertilizer.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So you have known--
it's sort of similar to what Evan was saying earlier.
If you have-- in the future, you have some plans
where you want to buy something larger in some ways, that
could be related to your planting, your seeds,
or machines that you want to buy and so on.
They're large expenditures, but you
have a daily or weekly income that's relatively small.
You need to just save money over time
to make sure you can afford that large expense, right?
And that could be also--
could be also a house.
It could be also school fees and so on.
But it could also be productive investments, as you suggested.
Any other?
Yeah, Angela.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] taking up higher risks in investment.
If you have savings, you can afford to maybe do something
that-- not only for your [INAUDIBLE]
even engage in another business that's more [INAUDIBLE]
than you would do if you just were very tight [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's a nice idea.
So, that's kind of related to the consumption smoothing idea.
It's to say suppose I have zero savings,
and you ask me, do I want to--
or I have some savings, not very much, and you ask me,
would I like to invest in something very risky?
I might say, well, no because, you know,
in case that goes bad, you know, then
I will have nothing to eat, or I'll have,
like, the whole family will be hungry,
or we don't have enough money for other basic necessities.
So I cannot sort of afford to make this investment,
this risky investment, because I essentially have no buffer
or no nothing that will help me in case sort of the risky
investment goes bad.
And that's sort of, I think, related to the consumption
smoothing idea slightly differently.
Any other idea?

Once you start working once you're
done with college, if you start working then in jobs,
why should you save, perhaps?
Yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] if you ever want to retire.
PROFESSOR: Retirement savings-- and why is that a useful idea?
Why should you save for retirement?
What are you trying to do here?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Right, and so--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] for [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So, exactly.
So, you work for income, make a lot of money hopefully.
And at some point, you will want to try to retire.
That--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: You might get some pension,
or you might get some social security
or some other transfers from family and so on.
But you'll probably have less money available
just because your income that you usually have from your job
will not be available, right?
And so why might it be useful, then, to save?
What is the saving doing, then?
STUDENT: You have like a buffer for however
many years you think you can go without working [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Mm-hm.
Yeah.
Any other-- that's right.
Any other thoughts on why saving for retirement is a good idea?

Yeah.
STUDENT: You may be [INAUDIBLE] unable
able to work [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
And then what happens?
So you might not be able to work at some point.
And then what happens with your consumption?
STUDENT: Consumption [INAUDIBLE] If you have money,
it will stay the same.
But if you can't work, [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right, it would drop a lot.
In the extreme case, you have nothing.
Then, of course, then you would starve,
or that would be very bad.
But even if you have some access to some Social Security
or some access to some pension that you
might have available from your employer, and so on that
might not be enough.
So essentially, what happened is your consumption level
would drop.
And again, that's related to the idea of consumption smoothing.
People like to have sort of roughly equal consumption
at different points in time in their lives.
So the idea is that again, the marginal dollar,
the additional dollar that you have available now
if you're fairly rich, if you're working, is worth less to you
than it will be once you're retired in 30 or 40 years.
And perhaps in particular when you're not
able to work anymore, you will not have very much money.
And then you want to use those savings.
So essentially, it's to say there's a life cycle.
Economists would call it a life cycle of consumption and income
where you might have, like, income predictably
varying over time.
You know that once you're like 80 years old,
you're not going to earn that much money anymore.
And therefore, you want to avoid large drops in consumption
because once you have-- if you have
these large drops in consumption,
it would be very valuable to have at least some savings
to purchase food and other types of clothes,
et cetera, and so on.
And so then savings can help to make consumption
more even over the lifespan, in particular through retirement
savings.
But it could also be in other periods.
If you wanted to--
if you knew that once you're 50, you wanted to travel the world,
that might be also a useful thing
to do if you don't have that income at that time.
So it doesn't have to be retirement per se.
We talked, then, about lumpy expenditures.
We've already talked already--
buying a machine, school fees, et cetera.
These are large expenditures where essentially, you're
trying to match your income to-- or the available income
or money that you have to your expenditures that you
have in different time periods, right?
You might get, like, a certain amount of money every day.
You might make $5 every day.
But at some point, you have to pay $100 of school fees.
Now your daily income will not be enough to cover that.
So now you need to save for at least 20 days
or whatever amount of time.
So you have then $100 that you can
use to pay for your kids' school fees.
So that's good.
So there's good reasons to say.
Economists think that savings, at least some savings,
is a good idea.
Now, yet, in reality, often people
are not saving very much.
And so what might be some reasons why people are not
saving?

Yes.
STUDENT: Perhaps they can't anticipate
what those lumpy expenses may be in the future [INAUDIBLE]
they have no way of knowing.
PROFESSOR: And why might they not anticipate those?
Like, the school fees are pretty predictable, you would say.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] if you don't
have very much expendable extra income in the first place,
you might think, oh, I'll never be able to afford that.
So it's not even something I'm considering.
So you just kind of spend the money on [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right.
So this is sort of the idea that people are
too poor to save in some ways.
That's to say, like, I just have very little income right now.
I need to feed my family.
I need to make sure that we have enough other necessities
for the household and so on.
And I just cannot afford to save for the future.
What would you say to that argument?
That's a very commonly-made argument,
and I think there's surely some truth to that.
But what would you say to that argument overall?
We could just say, look.
People are too poor to save.
Can't save.
Lecture over.
Let's focus on other topics.
Yes.
STUDENT: No matter your income level,
the consumption smoothing effect would still happen.
So, while it's really, really not
ideal to have to cut off any more of your income
if it's, like, causing you to have
to eat less or anything like that,
it would still probably be in your favor to
in case your income [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So, savings decisions crucially are
decisions between today versus tomorrow for given income
or given wealth level overall.
That is to say it's a within person decision
or within family decision where, like, you're poor today.
You're likely, very likely, also be poor tomorrow.
And it could be even that tomorrow,
things will be a lot worse.
[INAUDIBLE] you might have some income today,
no income tomorrow.
So, like, if you have, you know, say, $5 today,
and that's your income that you have for the week,
you probably want to, you know, save some of that money
to have that money tomorrow.
So essentially, that's to say it's all
about-- it's not about absolute levels overall of income
or poverty and so on, how much money people have overall.
Of course, it would be better to have
and it's easier, of course to--
if you have a lot of money, it's very easy
to save because you don't need to cover that many expenses.
But even if you're relatively poor,
in time periods that are relatively good-- so you have
a day that's a good day or like a no bad shock or you
make some good income.
Those are days in which you want to save for the future
because there might be potentially--
this is what we covered here.
There might be, like, bad shocks coming in the future-- say,
health shocks or the like.
It might also be that you want to save
some money for some form of retirement or the like.
In some ways, at least because you know in the future,
you might not be able to earn income--
or you have for example school fees for your kid.
And then you need to save.
In some ways, if you're able to afford them somehow,
you need to be able to save, in some way, at least
a little bit every day.