
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
STUDENT: It feels like a ROSCA is just more work than just
normal banking.
So wouldn't it cost a lot to manage all these monies
and cost a lot of money to--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we're going to talk about in a second
about-- let me actually get there right now.
I'm going to just skip this and say,
what are the advantages of ROSCAs over, say,
saving at home.
So you're exactly right.
And this is the disadvantage we're going
to talk about in a second.
You're exactly right that in some of these ROSCAs,
in particular if they're big and complicated,
you need to make sure that you have a good accountant
and that you organize and so on because otherwise you
end up in a huge mess, where essentially everybody paid
in some money.
They can't remember how much was paid in.
They got into fights and so on.
And so that's a bad situation to be in.
And good accountants in some ways
are hard to come by in many places,
including, say, in villages in India.
And so if you have somebody who's
very careful and good with math and good with numbers
and so on, a ROSCA--
and they would do it, probably, for free
if they don't have that much other things to do,
then I think that's a very good solution.
If you don't have a good accountant and so on,
that might be quite messy.
But let me return to that in a second.
What are advantages of ROSCAs overall?
Why are ROSCAs quite popular?
ROSCAs are very popular in many places of the world.
Why is that?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess, similar to the saving thing,
it eliminates your ability to spend that money now
when you know you have to put it in the pot every week
because there's that social pressure that other people are
relying on you to help them out with their expenses.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
There's peer pressure in our village.
And often these are people that I know pretty well.
And so if I'm just saying, well, this week
I don't feel like saving.
Mikey and my ROSCA friends will not be very happy with me.
And so there's peer pressure that gets me to save,
which makes it easier to save than saving on your own
in your bank account or at home, in many places.
Yeah, Lucas.
STUDENT: In the series who are not physically
holding cash at home.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the money is out of my hands.
Somebody needs to deal with the ROSCA pot and put it somewhere.
But at least four other people in a ROSCA of five
will not have this issue lying around.
Yes, Sam.
STUDENT: I think it, at least somewhat,
combats the time inconsistent preferences.
PROFESSOR: How?
STUDENT: So instead of--
I guess, if you save in your home,
the savings would grow linearly with how much you put in.
You have outsized returns at a point that is
relatively near in the future.
And so even though you value it less,
the fact that it's so much bigger than what you have
at that point evens it out.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So there's two reasons I think why ROSCAs might
help with time inconsistency.
One is about the peer pressure that makes you put in the money
in the first place.
Today I might not want to save.
I might buy ice cream instead.
But again, my ROSCA friends will get really mad at me if I
don't.
And therefore, I'll do it.
The second part is what Lucas was
saying, which is, well, I might not actually have access
to the ROSCA money right now because it's in some ROSCA
pot with my friend.
And so then it also limits some temptations of spending savings
because I don't have so much money lying around.
And then third, perhaps, there's also once you get the money,
it's a larger pot of money.
And it might be easier to invest that
into something useful than if you get $10 or small amounts
at each point in time.
That's easier to squander or spend on little things
here and there.
STUDENT: Maybe this is a secondary effect,
but it also might have a positive utility
from hoping to be the winner of the big pot.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I think there's something like looking forward
to some big, big expenses.
It's, in some sense, why people play the lottery.
Notice that ROSCAs are small.
We're going to talk about in a second why that is.
But usually, ROSCAs are relatively small in size.
They're not really helping you buy a house or something,
or for big expenses.
OK.
So we talked about peer pressure.
What else?

Why are ROSCAs good?
What do we like about ROSCAs?
Yes, Astrid.
STUDENT: It still regulates your saving habit
because you have to put that amount of money
in that particular concept stays via only just
put some random amount of money at a random time.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
That's a nice idea.
So exactly.
So it has very-- it's very rigid in some ways, which
is, I think, good and bad.
The good thing about it is, essentially exactly, it
builds savings habit.
Every week or every month or whatever our ROSCA schedule is,
we have to put in money.
And that's just a thing that happens regularly.
And having regular savings habits in particular,
when you read books about personal finance, et cetera,
a lot of the personal finance gurus will tell you,
building habits is really important.
Economists actually talk about this less.
But I think in reality or in practice,
that's quite important.
There's one last advantage of ROSCAs
that hasn't been mentioned, which anybody can
think of what that might be?
Suppose we want to all buy something for $50
and we save on our own.
Think about how long that will take us versus how long it
will take us in the ROSCA.

Yeah.
STUDENT: If people stick to the $10 thing,
I know it will take me five weeks.
As opposed to now it will take me just less time, so one week.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So everybody on their own will take five weeks exactly
because they get $10 per week, and it takes them five weeks.
Now, in the fixed order or bidding ROSCA,
depends-- say you have a fixed order ROSCA,
one person will get it immediately, or after one week
already.
The next person will get after two weeks.
The third person will get after three weeks and so on.
So the average amount of time it takes
is something like 2 and 1/2 weeks
roughly, so you will essentially get it faster.
Essentially, it's sort of getting credit in some sense.
You get something that you can purchase earlier.
And the ROSCA works in that way.
And the last person gets it after five weeks.
But they would have gotten it after five weeks
anyway at the speed that they're saving.
So we talked about these already.
So it makes it easier to save for larger expenditures.
For example, helps with self-control issues.
Makes it easier to save larger amounts quickly.
And the peer pressure might also be helpful.
What are limitations of ROSCA, or what are ROSCAs
not good for?
Why might you not be in a ROSCA?
So I think Daniel, I believe, was saying already,
there's accounting issues.
It's kind of like a hassle and complicated.
And if you don't have a good accountant
and if you're messy with money and so on,
then that might be tricky.
And you might get a lot of trouble with your ROSCA friends
if you do that.
Any other ideas?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I mean, yeah, maybe there's
a fee to be in one, like 10% or something.
I don't know.
And then if you're able to, you could mimic a fixed order ROSCA
in your house every month.
PROFESSOR: I see.
You're just saying you could recreate it yourself?
Now notice then, maybe you might not have the peer pressure
and so on.
But in principle, you could try to do this in your house
or with your friends in some sense.
Usually, there's no fees in the sense
that it's just a group of people who do it.
It's just somebody has to organize.
Sometimes maybe it varies over time who's--
there's sort of admin costs, if you want, as in somebody
did some hassle to do it.
Now, why do we not see ROSCAs for people buying a house, so
huge expenses?

Yeah, Daniel.
STUDENT: It's harder to let go of a large sum of money
for someone else to get something.
PROFESSOR: Interesting.
STUDENT: And then you have to wait to get.
And then not just that, but if I was the accountant
and you were giving me money to afford a house,
I'd feel like you're relying on them to have
so much integrity because--
PROFESSOR: Yes.
STUDENT: I feel like the temptation
to just disappear with that money would be ridiculous.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if Mikey and friends and I were in a ROSCA, and say
we pay like $1,000 or more every week or month.
And if Mikey were our accountant,
at some point he'll be like, that's
a lot, a lot of money in this ROSCA.
Goodbye.
No more recitation.
He's gone with his money from my ROSCA.
You're exactly right.
It just requires a lot of integrity,
a lot of-- essentially, you have very high incentives
at some point to just-- especially once you've
been-- either if you're the accountant,
you just run away with all of the money.
Or if you just have been paid out already--
notice, somebody gets paid first and others get paid later.
You might just say, oh, thanks very much.
I'm using that money, and goodbye.
Essentially, you need a lot of trust,
and you need a lot of way of punishing people
in some way socially or in other ways if they misbehave.
And that's often difficult to do.
And therefore, the size of ROSCAs
tend to be relatively small.
That's not to say they're not useful,
but they tend to be relatively small.
And last thing I think we talked a little bit about already
is flexibility.
So the lack of flexibility, the rigidity is, in some sense,
helpful for building new habits.
But if you're somebody who has very irregular income,
then this inflexibility is not very helpful
because sometimes you have a lot of money,
sometimes you don't have money.
And then you get in trouble with your ROSCA friends
again because you can't pay.