PROFESSOR: So next we're going to say--
look at a little bit at how do people actually
save in various settings.
So how do the poor save?
What do people do?

Yes, Olivia.
STUDENT: I think this was mentioned earlier by someone
over there.
But the building the house brick by brick
because, if you're putting the money into bricks now,
you can't spend it on other goods.
There's no more temptation because you've already-- you're
not going to dismantle a room once you've
started building it.
So that example of starting to work on--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so Abhijit's family,
Abhijit Banerjee's family was, in fact, doing that.
Whenever they had more money available, at some point
they built an extra room in their house.
Now exactly as you say, it's an illiquid investment, which
is to say, once you have built already some bricks
or started building a room, it's not something
that you can take away very easily.
Any other examples?

Zion.
STUDENT: Group saving mechanisms.
PROFESSOR: Group savings?
STUDENT: Like a merry-go-round, that kind of thing.
PROFESSOR: And how do they work?
Some of them are called ROSCAs.
What are ROSCAs?

STUDENT: I remember that one.
I remember--
PROFESSOR: That's the same as you described.
STUDENT: Yeah.
So basically, there would be a group of people
who agree to an arrangement.
They would put money in the pot every month.
Then one participant would randomly receive the whole pot.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So it would be like Mikey, Jay, Astrid, you,
and I would be in ROSCA.
We would decide to save every week or every day
or every month-- it can be very flexible-- say, $10.
And then how would this work?
So we'd save, say, every week $10, and then what happens?
STUDENT: Maybe Mikey would spin the wheel,
and then it would land on one of the four of us.
And he would get the whole $40.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we're five, I think.
Astrid and Jay are also in there,
and I'm also contributing, so the five of us.
So there's $50.
Now, the question is, who is, in the first week,
getting the money first?
One version of that is essentially randomizing.
And so Mikey would use his spinning wheel from classes
on Monday and spin the wheel.
And then whoever is first ends up being first.
It's called a fixed order, essentially randomized ROSCA,
where at the beginning we'd randomize.
We'd figure out what is the order.
And it could be random, or we can agree in some other ways.
And then we have a fixed order.
And then every week one person is getting $50 overall.
Is there any other order that you guys know
or that could be--
is there any other way to do this other than randomizing?

Yeah, Daniel.
STUDENT: You could maybe be like, someone
is sick in my family.
I have a very high need for the resources at this time.
It's mainly need based.
PROFESSOR: So you could just say--
you could just claim needs in some ways.
And whoever has an actual need in some sense--
maybe you can verify it in some sense.
And then we say, OK, it's your turn this week.
You can obviously claim it only once in five weeks.
But because we agree that your or my family has the highest
need to do that.
Is there some way of doing this--
so one way would be just to claim it.
Is there some other way of making that happen?

It's called a bidding--
bidding ROSCA.
How does that work?
That's exactly the idea that you say
some people have higher needs than others
in different places.
This could be because you have, say, somebody sick
in your family.
Or it could be like I have this really high-return investment
opportunity, where I need to purchase seeds,
or I need to purchase a machine right now.
And I really value that.
And I'm willing-- I need the money,
or I could use the money a lot more than other people.
What kind of mechanism could you do to make that happen?

Yeah.
STUDENT: You could vote.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You can vote.
Or it's called a bidding ROSCA because you can bid.
But how would that work?
STUDENT: Everybody could go around
and say whether they'd need it that week,
and then everybody votes for--
PROFESSOR: Suppose Mikey and I both say we need it right now.
So what could we do then?
STUDENT: Everybody who put money into it
could vote for one of you.
PROFESSOR: I see.
You can have a vote.
And then you could say I make a case, Mikey makes a case,
and then the other people could vote.
Yeah.
You could do that.
Or you could bid, I guess.
But how would the bidding work?
Lucas, maybe?
STUDENT: I mean, you could potentially,
especially if it's a fixed asset,
like a piece of machinery, you could agree to share it
for a period of time.
You could agree to each take half,
potentially, if it's deemed that you need it for the same reason
right now as well.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You could.
Yes.
Any other ideas?
STUDENT: Yeah.
With the bidding, you potentially--
you could have a minimum bid you have to put in the pot.
You could say it's $10, like you said.
And then to express your need, you could also
put in money beyond that.
And then whoever ends up putting in the most money
gets like the whole pot.
PROFESSOR: Correct.
And so, of course, what Zion was saying,
it's essentially we bid at each time.
I can, of course, only get the money--
so suppose we do five weeks.
Each person can only get the money once.
So it's only about who gets the money first.
And the first week, Mikey and I both are saying
we want the money right now.
Mikey has some business opportunity,
and I have some health expenditures.
We both say we really want the money.
So then it's sort of tricky to say who needs it more.
Economists would say, why didn't you just bid?
Why didn't you just sort of express
your willingness to pay for this money right now?
So then, I would bid, say, $10, and Mikey would bid $15.
Which means essentially, Mikey gets then--
so he has to put in the $15, but he will get the $50 back.
So he gets, I guess, $35 in this case.
And I would get nothing.
I would get it in the future.
Then the $15 go into the pot, and everybody else
would be distributed between everybody else.
Does that make sense?
So suppose-- $15 was not a great number.
Suppose Mikey bid $16, which essentially would mean
that he would have to pay $16.
He'd get the $50, so on that he gets $34.
OK?
He puts in the $16, so then everybody else
gets four extra dollars out of this pot
whenever their time comes.
So I would get, in, say, in the next week,
so I would get four extra dollars from that.
And so then the idea of that is, well, it's
efficient because whoever needs the money most, whoever
has the highest value of their money
right now will be able to bid the most.
And in addition, some people, essentially, get more--

get paid out more.
If I never bid, I just get whatever other people bid.
So I get more money.
It's almost like receiving interest on your payment.
You were saying something else, I think.
STUDENT: Yeah.
It seems like, at least in my opinion,
like a self-defeating process.
Presumably if they need the money the most,
they might also have the least money
available to bid at that time.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I think that's right.
I think the bids are often not super high in some sense.
It doesn't actually happen so much that people
need the money right now.
So a lot of these bids tend to be not super high.
So it's about-- it's like $5 versus $3 or something.
So then I think how much money you actually get.
You're exactly right.
If I really need the money.
I have a big emergency, and I have
to bid $40 to get the $50, that defeats the whole purpose
of the whole thing.
And then I just don't have enough money available and so
on.
But I think in reality, that's not the case.
And you know, bidding ROSCAs are a thing.
People are doing that quite a bit.
But I think in general, people are also
reasonable in the sense that, if Mikey knows
I have a health emergency right now
and he has an investment that he could
make this week or next week and so on, maybe he
will just not bid that high and just
let me get the money overall.
And then next time, I will reciprocate.
STUDENT: Yeah.
I feel like this is a mix of what Julie
said, with the voting kind--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
The voting would take that out because if I
can make a case that my family really needs it right now,
probably most people would agree,
even if Mikey's investment opportunity is amazing.
Yeah.
STUDENT: So I don't know if this is how people actually do it,
but the easiest way I could think of
to fix the bidding ROSCA would be to just do a raffle.
So a ticket is $10, and everybody can buy however
many tickets they want.
And then you're willingness to pay for tickets, you know,
that increases your likelihood of winning the whole thing.
PROFESSOR: I see.
So that's right.
But I think it could also be then inefficient because I
buy 20 tickets and you have only one,
you could still get the money.
And then I still have my health issues and you have the money
and so on.
But you're right.
Maybe that would be also perceived
as more fair and so on.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Something I'm having trouble understanding is--
maybe I'm just not understanding the relative size of a pot
to a ticket or a bid.
But if you need to spend money now--
or if you need money now for that kind of large expenditure,
how can you afford to put it into a bid?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So essentially, I take it away from the money
that I'm getting out anyway.
Suppose we all put in $10.
It's five people overall, so whatever money I
will get paid out will be $50.
Right?
And so now I'm saying I'm willing to pay $10, which
essentially, if I don't have it right now,
it just means, effectively, I get $40 instead of $50.
Right?
But I don't need any liquidity right now.
Because exactly as you say, if I don't have money right now
and really need it, then I don't have $10 anyway.
Javy, yes.
STUDENT: Could we also structure the bidding
like an interest repayment on a loan instead?
PROFESSOR: Say more.
STUDENT: So instead of putting the money up front now,
you pay the bid as an interest on your loan down the line?

PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
You could say that, but then there's-- exactly.
You could say I'm willing to pay.
I'm going to just pay $2 more for any of my future payments
into the ROSCA next week or next month or whatever.
Right?
If I don't have the money right now.
Yeah.