PROFESSOR: So now let me go back to the other types
of savings vehicles.
So ROSCA is very popular.
What other products or types of features exist?
We talked about brick-by-brick already,
but what else do we have?

If you went to India, what would you
see in terms of how do people save?
Yes?
STUDENT: I think it was--
I'm unsure if I think it was a thing about women in India
saving through larger bills.
So they would put them, for example--
I'm not sure.
I read this somewhere, but I can't remember where.
And that they would save stuff in larger bills
so that they wouldn't be tempted to spend it.
And it's easy to save in larger bills
because you're not tempted to spend it,
but also it's easier to store.
So they put it under the mattress or whatever.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So there's essentially just saving up your home
under the mattress, et cetera.
Now that still has-- other people
might try to get the money from you and so on
and the family, et cetera.
But it might be easier and less--
compared to having huge amounts of bills because then,
once you have a lot of very small bills,
it's much easier to give it away to people in the family
and so on.
But I think at home, under the mattress, et cetera,
is one way people save.
What else do we have?

What about jewelry and gold?
What do people do that?

Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: Especially if the currency is pretty variable
and inflation is high, stuff like gold--
one, it's very dense, so there's a lot
of value in something pretty small,
so it doesn't take a lot of storage.
And two, it hold its value very well.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Gold holds its value.
Usually, it's somewhat, at least, protected
in inflation and so on because the value of gold
will also go up if prices go up and so on.
And as you say, it's very dense and you don't
have to have a huge piece of--
or pieces of whatever bills and so around.
And you can actually wear it on--
potentially, you can wear it.
The jewelry, at least, and so on, you can.
And gold is gold.
It's very easy to verify what it is and so on.
And that's been very popular as well.
Now there's other sort of financial savings.
There's things called moneyguards, savings collector,
and self-help groups.
What are those?

Any of these-- moneyguards, savings collectors,
or self-help groups.

So let's start with the self-help groups.
That's essentially a form of a ROSCA, just more flexible
in some sense.
That's just to say I might have my three friends.
We all want to say we meet every Wednesday
and talk about ways to save, maybe remind
each other to save, but one version of that would be,
then, let's do a ROSCA and have a clear structure.
But it could also just be we're trying
to save in some other ways, jointly or individually,
and just support each other.
And I save $10, and then Mikey will tell me great job
and motivate me to save more.
And maybe it motivates him to save more as well.
Then there's other versions of that,
which are moneyguards-- somebody in the neighborhood who
acts as a bank, so they keep money at their home.
Or savings collector-- somebody in neighborhood
collects money and deposits it at the bank.
And that helps with the fixed costs
because if you sort of collect the money
from 20 people in your village and put it to the bank,
then you can only have to pay fees for one person as opposed
to for 20 people.
Of course, again, that leads to issues of accounting, issues
with reliability, and so on.
And then, more recently, there's a lot
more phone or internet-based digital savings
accounts where, essentially, you can save on your phone
or on the internet, more broadly.
That's been a lot more popular in recent years.
And that, of course, deals with a lot
of the issues that have come up because, maybe, there's
fewer fixed costs, for example.
It's just much easier administratively and so on.
You don't have to go to an actual bank, et cetera.
Finally, there's microcredit.
Yes, Mikey?
STUDENT: One more that I don't remember
if this is in the book, but you could
buy an animal as a savings.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
People do that a lot--
for example, cows.
Now you have to have quite a bit of money
to buy a cow in the first place.
So you have to figure out how to get that much money overall.
But people do that.
Why is it a good idea to invest in a cow?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Because like you could always
sell the cow to get that money back,
but then, also, the cow is drinking passive income
in the form of [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: So it's an asset that has
certain returns-- in particular, milk, or, for other animals,
that might be helpful on a daily basis to support your family.
Now can you sell half a cow?
No, of course.
And so this is kind of similar to the strategy
Angela was saying.
If you have very large bills only, what you can do
is you can sort spend it all in some ways.
Of course, you can change the bills in your case.
But if you have a cow, you can either sell
the entire cow or not.
But you can't sell, like, 1/10 of a cow.
So if you just want a small amount to buy ice cream,
you're not going to sell your cow to do that.
So essentially, it's illiquid, which also potentially helps
you with self-control problems.
But that's also a very popular thing to do.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Has there been studies of if ROSCAs helped wellbeing
or how much?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, there's quite a bit of work on ROSCAs overall.
We're going to talk a little bit about one of the--

so one of the studies we're going to talk about
is giving people access to savings accounts overall.
But one of the studies, towards the end,
we're going to also talk about ROSCA
is actually helpful for increasing health expenditures.
Do people now purchase more preventative health goods
and are better able to deal with shocks?
I think one thing that hasn't been studied so much
is the question of are people, overall,
better off in some ways in the sense
that ROSCAs might be good in terms of helping you save,
but maybe it makes you feel terrible every week because you
get really stressed about your ROSCA members being mad at you
and so on.
I think that's been less studied overall,
but I think there's plenty of work trying to understand
if ROSCA is useful, why are they there, and so on,
and what are their purposes.
But let me get back to that in a bit.
Now let me very briefly talk about microcredit
as a savings instrument.
Why might microcredit be a good savings instrument
or how does that work?
It seems like the opposite of savings,
but somehow people use it a lot for savings as well.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Essentially, this is [INAUDIBLE],, specifically money
[INAUDIBLE] later.
They just take out a bunch of money,
and they can buy whatever they need and slowly pay it back.
[INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's exactly right.
So essentially, if I wanted to buy a TV,
I could save a lot of money until I have a TV,
and maybe that's tedious for me to do for various reasons
that we already discussed.
Or I could just go to a store and say,
hey, I would like to buy this TV and then
buy it, essentially, on credit.
I take a loan.
Now it could be from a microcredit organization
or from a moneylender or from the store itself.
And then I just pay back in weekly or monthly installments.
It's also very popular in the US--
in weekly or monthly installment, I pay it back.
Now the advantage, of course, is that I
get the TV right now, not in a year from now,
until I have saved it.
Another advantage is that now, in some sense,
somebody else is bugging me to get the money.
So in some sense, the responsibility
has now shifted to the other person who's
getting the money from me.
A downside, of course, is that it's often quite expensive
to do.
Instead of getting positive interest on my savings,
as I accrue the savings over time,
I have to now pay high interest-- often very
high interest, 20% or higher even per year.
And that's a very expensive thing to do.
But, of course, you also get the good earlier.
So that's also a very popular thing that people have done.
OK, we talked about ROSCAs already.
So then let me speed up a little bit
since I want to tell you about the exciting research papers.
So what are other important features of savings product?
We talked a little bit about liquidity already.
It's important to understand whether a savings
product is liquid or not.
Liquidity can be good and bad.
In some ways, liquidity can be very good in the sense like,
if I want to save and I worry about health shocks,
or I worry about a drought or really bad things
where I need money right now, unexpectedly, you
want your savings to be liquid so you can deal
with these types of shocks.
Liquidity can be bad if you think
you have self-control problems because, then, you
want to have illiquid assets.
You want to have a cow or you want
to have bricks in your house and so on.
You want to not be able to access
your money because if it's not accessible,
then self-control problems are not so much of an issue.
So it depends a little bit what the purpose or what
the situation of the person is with the liquidity is
good or bad.
Then, as I talked already, there's
needs for careful accounting in for many of these ROSCAs
or other types of organizations.
And then social pressure turns out
to be a really important feature, which
we're going to return to.
This is just the idea that other people--
you announce to everybody else what your savings plans are,
and other people, in some ways, one way or the other,
will hold you accountable and perhaps will
think of you less if they learn that you haven't followed
through with your plan, or they just get mad at you
because they're in your ROSCA.