PROFESSOR: So then-- and this is a version
of this, Dupas-Robinson now in a second paper.
This is a very similar setting, but a second paper
trying to look at what kinds of savings accounts
are most effective in increasing savings.
And does this lead to higher, not-- sorry, or--
sorry.
Does this lead to higher health expenditures and thus
a better health?
Does not having access to good savings
account lead to lower health expenditures and worse health?
And so now what they do is they have an experiment in Western
Kenya where they randomly offer different kinds of savings
devices to people where they're going to look at the outcome.
And this is now a general population
where the outcome is usage of these savings devices,
or people actually using them.
Second, are they investing, and does access,
or getting access to these savings
accounts help people invest in preventative health
investments?
So for example, purchasing bed nets.
And does it help people to deal with acute health emergencies?
Notice we have two different things here.
One is about making investments that are good for you
in the future, preventative health investments, which
is bed nets, or other types of things that are good for you
in the future, and to say helping people
with acute health emergency.
For example, if somebody has malaria right now,
you need some medication, or you need to go to the doctor,
is it helpful to have a good savings account to help you
with these types of shocks?
The motivation for this type of work
is from what you had seen before from previous work
from Pascaline Dupas.
You saw several papers that show once people
have given bed nets for free, they're happy about them.
They use them, they're helpful in reducing malaria and so on.
So people are very happy to have health goods once you give them
to them for free, but people are very hesitant to buy them
in many situations.
And often one situation that they often--
or one reason why people say I can't really-- or I'm not
really buying is they say, I don't have enough money.
Then you might say, well, couldn't you get some credit?
Often, people are also very credit constrained.
There's not that much credit available for them
and interest rates are very high.
So credit is not really a great option in many situations.
And then you say, well, couldn't we
just get people to save for doing that?
And now is it the case that not having the right savings
accounts prevents people from making these purchases.
Now there's a lot of detail here,
which I think we don't need to get into too much overall.
We're going to talk About--
So there's four different treatments.
Three treatments are about preventative health investments
and there's two treatments, or one treatment more about-- two
of these, then, about emergency health treatments.
This difference is not that important for you.
What's important is one treatment
is there's a safe box.
This is, as before, that's essentially-- now
instead of having a bank account,
this is just a safe box that you have at home.
So I'm giving you a little box where you have the key.
You can keep the key, you can lock it
and put it into your house.
It's meant to be for--
so it's just storage of your money.
You can do with it whatever.
You can open it whenever you want.
It's meant to be for health expenditure.
It's sort of designed-- essentially,
it's labeled as a health savings account,
but there's nothing that stops you from using it
for other purposes.
That's essentially just a box where
you can put the money into instead
of, say, having it below your mattress or somewhere
else at home.
Second is a lock box.
This is the same as the safe box,
but now I'm keeping the key as the surveyor,
as the experimenter.
So you can put in the money, but you cannot take it out unless
you come to us at some times every once in a while.
I think after a few months, you get access to this account,
but you cannot take it out at will.
So this essentially is a commitment savings account,
very similar to the one that I just showed you.
And the money, then, also could only
be used for health expenditures.
So not only is it a commitment account,
it's also an account where essentially the expenses are
earmarked for, in this case, I guess for preventative health
investments.
You can only buy bed nets with it or the like.
Once you take out the money, I'm offering you
these different goods and you can purchase them from me.
And then there's two more.
One is sort of a health pot, which essentially is--
and this is closest to what-- it's an evaluation of a ROSCA.
People already have lots of ROSCAs.
And you can say, OK, now let's just add a health
pot to your ROSCA as well.
Whatever you're doing in your sort of ROSCA anyway,
you're going to just add a health pot and say,
is this health pot-- with your members of the ROSCA and so on,
is this health pot going to be helpful for you?
Again, the money is only supposed
to be used for health expenditure, health
investments.
Now here, there's also some social commitment and credit.
That's to say now, your ROSCA friends
and so on will bother you if you don't
put in money for the ROSCA.
And then finally, there's a health savings account where
essentially you're encouraged to make deposits
into your health savings account managed by ROSCA treasurer.
This is like one person in your ROSCA is like the accountant,
and you can only use these expenses
for acute health issues.
So if you have a health emergency, you can use it.
If you want to use the money for other stuff, you cannot.
That's a lot of detail, but that's the basic structure.
Now why would these features matter?
Let me go a little bit quicker here.
One is storage.
That's just having this box.
Outright theft is not so much of an issue.
It's not like-- and also you could just take the whole box
anyway, but it's more like protection
from temptation from yourself and from others.
So once you have it in the box, of course you can open the box
and take it out.
But once it's labeled as a health account,
and then maybe other people might
be less likely to ask you.
You might be better at saying no to them.
Maybe you might be also less likely to spend
the money on ice cream if it's in like a health lock box
anyway.
And it creates some form of what economists
would call mental account because the box is really
designed for health savings.
And there's some research that shows
once you create these mental accounts for people,
once you say this is a health savings account,
your money should be used for health savings,
people tend to follow that, even though there's no restriction
whatsoever for doing that.
People treat that as the health money
and want to spend this money on health as opposed
to on other types of things.
Second, the earmarking, essentially, some
form of commitment.
That's like a stronger commitment here now.
This is some very weak commitment in the sense
that maybe you have some internal costs,
so people will judge you in some sense.
This is a stronger commitment device.
You cannot take the money out.
Also it's therefore stronger protection from temptations
or from others.
But of course now it involves liquidity costs
and lowers your ability to respond to acute shocks.
If you-- this is what we discussed before.
If you need the money right now for other things,
you just cannot do that and people might not like that.
And then finally, there's social commitment and credit,
which is--
you can see this here in the health
part that's used in the ROSCA.
But only the ROSCA has this.
And that involves peer pressure and you
can get the health product early, again, because
of the ROSCA study as we discussed before.
This is like everybody puts in some money,
and then one person can get it first, and then the next one,
and so on.
So I get some sense, some credit get the money earlier.
So now what the paper is doing, it's
just-- you're looking at first take
up of people using these devices.
And you see after six months and after 12 months,
a large share of people are using these accounts.
They still have the lockbox, or the safe box,
but also usage is defined as having money in this account.
Is there money actually in your box right now?
And so something like between 60% and 93%,
or 97% even of people still use these accounts
six months, or 12 months later.
That seems to be a quite popular thing to do for people.
And then access to these, so giving access
to these technologies increases expenditures
in health products.
So this is now Kenyan Shillings spent on preventative health
products.
You see the safe box and the health pot
have pretty large effects.
So if I just give you a secure place in your home
to put this money that's labeled as a health investment
account or box, that increases quite a bit
your amount spent on preventative health products
later.
That's not true for the lock box.
So why might that be?
I was telling you already before, the lock box is
stronger in terms of commitment, but that's
precisely why, perhaps, people don't like it.
Because once you put in the money,
you're sort of stuck with it.
You can't use it for anything else.
So it's very inflexible and maybe it's
too strict for people.
And therefore, at least in this setting,
it seems to be that, at least on average,
the effects are smaller and not statistically significant
compared to a control group.
And then finally, the health savings account
helped deal people with shock.
So then later after 12 months, people were asked,
did you have health shocks and were you able
to deal with them?
And were you able to pay for health expenditures
and so on for illnesses during the last three months?
And you see essentially people are--
this is negatively phrased, so they're
more likely to be able to pay for these health shocks later.
So having, essentially, this health pot with a ROSCA
is helping people deal with shocks.
People are doing better in some ways,
in terms of dealing with their health overall.
This is not answering your question
exactly about are people doing better in terms of well-being.
I don't think there's happiness, or depression, or other types
of measures done.
But I think arguably, it's a good thing
if you're able to deal with health shocks in your family.
And to the fact that people keep using these accounts
even months later is encouraging.
So what are the results?
The results overall were simply providing a safe place
to keep your money increases health savings by a lot.
This, in turn, increased people's investment
in their health, including like things
like bed nets and the like.
Commitment features were actually
not helpful in this setting beyond.
So it's better to give people just
a box that's labeled as a health account in this setting
compared to an account where you can only--
not take out the money, perhaps because the commitment feature
was too strong and not helpful here.
That doesn't mean that it's not helpful in other settings,
but in this setting at least, it was not helpful.
And then why are the ROSCAs helpful?
People say essentially mostly this is about social pressure.
That seems to have been quite important.
One caveat here is that once you look at different studies,
subsequent studies in Uganda, Malawi, and Chile,
some of the same authors, or similar author teams
find less evidence of these accounts
being helpful in other settings.
We don't quite exactly know why that might be.
