
PROFESSOR: As I already said, commitment devices
can be helpful for people, in some cases.
But demand for these commitment devices
tends to not be super high because often, they
lack flexibility.
Sometimes it's just too strict, this would be similar--
if you have your browser that restricts, essentially,
all internet activity and so on, but at some point,
you just want to meet your friend
or send them a short message.
I guess you have your phone.
You can do that anyway.
But essentially, once you have some emergency or other types
of issues that come up, these commitment devices
tend to be very rigid and not very flexible.
So then in addition then, because of that,
people don't tend to follow through with their plans,
and then have to pay penalties.
And then they're worse off than they
would have been if they had never even been
offered or chosen this commitment device.
So one solution, then, is soft-commitment device,
where the cost of not following through is not money--
so you don't lose any money or the like--
but rather, you get some social sanction or loss of reputation.
I think that's exactly what Julie was saying,
earlier, about the idea being, once you declare,
to some other people in your village,
someone to your friends, or other people that you know,
that you're going to do something, and they can learn,
then, subsequently, whether you did it or not,
people will judge you if you don't follow through.
If you keep saying certain things
and then don't follow through, people will judge you
or reprimand you in some other ways.
And so the idea here, in this setting is that--
so these are villages in India.
The idea is to encourage savings by assigning
a unique monitor to each saver.
So if I were the saver, I would say Jay would be my monitor
or it would be assigned to be my monitor.

Each participant is asked to make a bet with themselves
about their ability to save over six months.
So I would be asked, how much would you
like to save over the next six months?
I would be very overconfident, and say lots of money, say
$5,000.
Then the stakes, here, are just reputation gain or loss
from progress, in front of some other member in the village.
So Jay, who would be in my village,
would be told about my goal.
We'd say Frank has announced this goal.
And the monitor is informed about the target amount,
and then essentially, every two weeks,
simply informed about the progress.
OK?
She just learns, over time, what I've
been up to, how much I have saved, nothing else.
There's no actually activity.
In some sense, she doesn't have to do anything.
She's just informed.
Now of course, over time, she can then
learn whether I reached my $5,000 or not,
and then, perhaps, judge me.
She can also tell Mikey or Charles or other people
around her about my lack of progress or my progress.
And I might be worried about that.
And so why would people care about the monitor?
This is from participants, themselves.
Often, the concern is about this monitor might tell others.
Or people-- my friends, neighbors, important people
in the village, will learn.
And I will look like somebody who doesn't really
stick to his word or the like or is just kind of flaky.
And people don't want to be flaky in the village.
So once people have made these goals they want to stick to.
And then the monitors might be able to help them with that.
So now, what kind of person might be a good monitor?
If you could choose, in the network, what kind of person
would you pick?
We've talked about this, a little bit, already.
But suppose there's a network of people
and some people talk to some people and others talk
to others.
And they're connected in some ways.
What kind of person would be a good monitor for you,
if you think about, say, MIT?

Suppose you declared that you're going to do all the problem
sets until Friday and so on and so forth, and you can design,
as a monitor, what kind of monitor would be good for you?
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: If you have an academic advisor in the MIT example,
but in the village, it could be someone
who's respected within the village, so
a local religious leader.
PROFESSOR: Somebody who's important, yeah.
What else.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Somebody who talks loud?
Somebody--
PROFESSOR: Somebody who's chatty.
So suppose Mikey is very chatty and likes
to talk a lot to others and is a gossip,
then I want him to be my monitor,
but only if I follow through.
If I don't follow through, now everybody
will know that I haven't saved because he
will talk to lots of people.
So that's one.
And then do you want some people whom you know well or not well?
Or what do you want from those?
Yeah?
STUDENT: I think you want someone
who doesn't have a stake in you not saving money,
so not someone like a spouse or family member, who
might be asking you for money because then, they might not
encourage you to save.
PROFESSOR: Right.
But what about somebody who's really far away from you
from the network, like if they live
in a very different house from yours
and you don't ever talk to them?
Go or bad monitor?
STUDENT: Bad because there's really
not very much social pressure.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
And they also don't know your friends, right?
So you want approximate-- somebody who's close by, maybe
not too close, in some sense, but close by,
who will be chatty and will particularly
talk to people that you care about and that you run into a.
Lot OK?
And so my friend, [? Arun, ?] who's one of the authors
of this paper, loves to do this in comics.
So here's a network that he has written out.
Don't ask me who all these characters are.
But essentially, suppose you're the experimenter.
I guess this is Donald Duck, I think.
And suppose you are-- this is the participant in the study.
And now think about different monitors.
Suppose this person is a monitor.
That's a person with low centrality.
What does that mean?
That somebody who doesn't have a lot of connections to others.
And so if they talk to their friend
here, whatever this feature is, that's
not going to go very far in the network.
So you might talk to this guy.
And this one might talk to Bugs Bunny.
But it doesn't get very far because this guy is not
very connected.
If instead now, the monitors is Bugs Bunny,
himself, maybe he will talk to all sorts of people.
Lots more people are being affected.
Lots more people, in the village,
will judge you if you don't follow through.
Similarly, if you have a monitor that's
really far away in the network, where this fellow here,
in the upper right, you really don't really care.
Even if this person talks a lot, that's
really far away from you, from the network--
in the network.
You don't really care about these people.
You don't really run into them.
You might not even not know them that well and so on.
So it doesn't really matter how much this person talks.
On the other hand, if the person is here, maybe now,
he talks to these two fellows, these
are very proximate in your network.
You care a lot more about these two guys, knowing about things,
than people really being far away.
So is does this all to say?
This is to say that want people who are central in the network.
And you want people who are proximate in the network.
And this experiment was essentially
varying all that, was essentially
randomizing whether you had a monitor versus not.
And it was randomizing whether this monitor was either central
or not, or whether it was a proximate person, who
was nearby, in some sense, in the network, to you, or further
away.
What do they find?
They find, exactly as theory would suggest,
that being assigned a savings monitor, on average,
increases savings by quite a bit, by 36%.
Where is the money coming from?
Declines in expenditures and festivals,
transportation, also increased labor supply.
People work a little bit more if they have a monitor.
Information does flow through the network.
About 63% of monitors tell others
about the saver's progress.
So they're pretty chatty, overall.
And then the more central ones, or the chattier ones
and the proximate monitors, lead to larger increases in savings.
So if somebody who is pretty close to you is your monitor,
and who is chatting a lot, then you
increase your savings the most.
Interestingly, these effects actually
persist 15 months later.
That's a long time.
Lots of people-- usually, these things tend to go away easily.
There's a 34% increase in total savings, so overall savings,
not just the savings that you said
you would do as part of the experiment, and again,
an increased ability to respond to shocks.
So what is that to say?
That's to say that peer pressure,
like social-commitment devices, in some ways, can be helpful.
Very briefly, why is this a commitment device?
Well, it's a commitment device because essentially, you
make misbehaving more costly.
Right?
I'm declaring to everybody in the village,
or to some monitor, that I'm going to save a lot of money.
Now my price, in terms of social sanctions, of misbehaving,
is a lot higher.
Right?
If I don't say anything, I can misbehave.
I can not save.
I can save.
Nobody will find out what my plans were.
But by declaring my goal to save a lot,
and telling it to everybody, that
creates a social-commitment device of sort,
and a soft-commitment device, where
I'm getting socially sanctions.
And that leads to some form of peer pressure.
And people really, in particular in these small villages,
care a lot about what other people think of them.
And that can be very effective in increasing,
in this case, their saving, changing their behavior,
and then increasing people's behavior to deal with shocks.
OK, then very briefly--
I don't have really a time for this anymore--
but one thing you can think about, perhaps a little bit,
is, well, one thing you could do is, you could provide people
with different savings accounts or different types of savings
environment that might change people's behavior.
That might be commitment devices or other types of accounts
or social-commitment devices, peer pressure, et cetera.
Another thing you might be able to say
is, well, why are people so impatient in the first place?
What drives their preferences for their present bias
or their impatience in the first place, the time
inconsistencies?
I have some work in India, one paper on alcohol consumption,
one paper on sleep, which I'll tell you a little bit about,
I think, during the next few weeks,
where essentially, we randomize or vary
whether people are either drinking more versus less.
In some studies, people are incentivized to drink less.
And they have higher sobriety.
That increased savings among rickshaw drivers.
In another study, we offer people the opportunity
to nap at the study office.
So people sleep more.
And when people sleep more, they're
also less present biased and save more money.
So that's to say, essentially, whether people
are impatient versus not depends not only
on your environment, commitment devices, or other things
you have, but perhaps also on internal things, in terms of,
have you slept well, are you drunk,
or in this case, by [? Alan and Ertac, ?]
people are getting students to imagine themselves
in the future.
You can essentially train people to be more patient.
And that's a very different approach
that has at least some success in increasing
people's patience, and therefore getting people
to care more about the future, invest more in education,
save more, et cetera.
There's also another study, that's
one of my favorite studies, that essentially
has some software that makes people see how they will look
when they are in the future, when they're old, and then
looks at people's savings plans, and find some evidence that
doing that, and seeing what you might look like in 40, 50, 60
years, will change how much you want to save because you can
connect to your future self more.
Let me conclude, since I'm out of time.
Many of the poor face both internal
external and internal constraints to savings.
Simply providing people with safe ways to save
can have large effects on people's savings.
Commitment devices, in some ways, can work.
But often, they can also hurt people.
And therefore, they tend to not be super popular,
in particular, when they're hard-commitment devices.
Softer forms of commitment devices,
such as social pressure, like groups, [? roscas, ?]
et cetera, can help people follow through
with their savings plans, and perhaps are
better able or better equipped to mitigate
people's self-control problems.


True or false? You will always want to save, so if you are not saving, you are probably making a mistake, whether due to a lack of self-control, foresight, ability to say no to your family or friends, etc.



True

False



True or false? Savings instruments should always be “illiquid,” i.e., you should not be able to easily pull money out. That way, it is easier to resist the temptation to spend it on frivolous things that get in the way of your savings goal. This is why a cow is a good savings instrument: it is not so easy to sell a cow, let alone a fraction of one to pay for a beer after work.



True

False


True or false? If you take a commitment device, that means the commitment device must always be “welfare improving,” i.e., it must in every case bring you positive utility.



True

False

