PROFESSOR: So far, this is about essentially--
this is about external constraints
in terms of just not having access to savings accounts.
And once you provide with these savings accounts,
people are doing better.
So this is all about people's external environments
in a sense, that if people had-- everybody had free savings
accounts, presumably they would do a lot better
or would be able to save more, at least
for women in this case.
But it's nothing about internal constraints.
So what about internal constraints?
We talked about this already.
Anybody remember the story of Ulysses and the Sirens
that, I think, Esther mentioned already
during the health session?
Anybody remember what the story is?
Yes, please.
STUDENT: Yeah.
Like, he wanted to hear the sirens sing,
but he knew it was going to be too beautiful
and he'd want to jump off the boat
and get into the water with them.
But since he still wanted to hear,
he had them tie him to the mast of the ship.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And in particular, so he was tied to the mast.
Exactly.
And what did the rowing people do?
STUDENT: Covered their ears.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So there was not only the looks, I guess,
but also the sound of them.
So I think he actually wanted to listen to them.
But he just knew that he would not be able to resist.
And I guess the rowing crew were just not allowed to listen
and had their ears covered and, therefore, were also
not falling for them.
And so this is essentially the idea of a commitment device.
Can somebody define or tell me what a commitment device is?

Yeah.
STUDENT: In this case, it would be tying himself to the pole.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but what is a commitment device?
What's the definition of a commitment device?
STUDENT: It keeps you accountable.
And it's restrictive to the point that it's like a binary
up until--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
There's more continuous versions of that.
But essentially, the idea is that you
have a certain behavior in the future that you do not--
that you know that you might engage in the future
if you don't restrict yourself in certain ways.
And you have some preferences for your future self.
You do not want your future self to engage in certain behaviors,
be that spending too much money, be that jumping into the water,
or be that doing all sorts of other things
that you don't want yourself to do in the future.
You know that your future self will disagree.
Your future self will say, oh, these sirens sound amazing.
I've got to jump into the water or whatever.
And therefore, you know already that you're going
to misbehave in the future.
And therefore, you want to change your future self's
behaviors.
The way you might be able to do that,
essentially, is to restrict your options.
In this case, very extremely, you'd
just tie yourself to the mast.
You're just not able to do anything, or you just cannot--
you cannot move, essentially.
And therefore, the option of falling for the sirens
is essentially not available anymore.
It's just taking away certain options.
Another version of a commitment device
would be to make certain options more costly.
You could say, for example, in savings account,
one option to have a commitment savings account is to say you
cannot take out money from an account until a prespecified
time.
That's exactly the equivalent or the same thing
as tying yourself to the mast, is taking away an option.
If I say I have a savings account,
and I can only take out money on June 30.
And before that, I cannot do this.
Now essentially, if tomorrow or next week
or whenever I come and I say I want to take out money,
I just do not have that option anymore.
And people might choose commitment savings accounts
precisely because they know that, if they are not choosing
a commitment savings account, they
will take out the money prematurely and spend it
on stuff they don't want themselves
to spend in the future.
So you might say I can only take out the money,
say, next year or the like.
We're just taking away certain options.
That's sort of a discrete version of, essentially,
it's either 1 or 0.
You can do it or you cannot do it.
Another version of this would be to just make it more expensive.
You can say there's a 10% withdrawal fee or the like.
But essentially, you can take out the money,
but it's very costly to do so.
OK?
Any other commitment devices that you guys know?
What about spending too much money online?
What commitment devices exist for that?

Yeah.
STUDENT: I mean, aren't there browser blockers,
where you can block specific sites so [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
There's browser blockers.
There's also whole system-wide blockers, essentially,
where you just cannot visit certain sites or just
don't work or the like.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Social-- I personally will be like, OK,
if I do this--
I'll tell my friends my goals.
And if I break them, I'll tell my friends
that I broke them or something.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
That's very interesting.
And those friends are they--
what kind of features do your friends
need to have to make that work?
So, you're saying some--
she's asking some friends about goals she wants to do.
And then there's some form of social or other sanctions
from the friends in case she doesn't follow through.
So what kind of friends do you need for that?
STUDENT: They also follow through?
PROFESSOR: They follow through, and they're also
strict with you.
So I used to have, in grad school,
I had a good office mate.
And we would have these commitment devices
where there's some website called StickK.
And the website StickK is as follows.
You can put down some money, say $100,
and then say if you don't specify an action, which
would be write the draft of your paper,
if you do not do this action, the $100 go
to some prespecified purpose, for example,
to the pro-smoking association or like the pro other types
of purposes associations, so money that you really do not
want to go to that cause, if you don't follow through.
And then you need a referee, which was, in this case,
my office mate.
You need a referee who decides whether or not you
have actually followed through.
Now, anybody can guess what the problem with this
potentially is?
So I'm saying until Friday night I'm
going to write at least five pages of my paper draft.
And otherwise, $100 will go to this association
that I don't agree with.
What is the problem potentially?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I mean, your friend probably also
doesn't want it to go to the organization
so they can be relaxed with you.
PROFESSOR: Correct.
So in all of those cases, I would not
follow through and then persuade my friend
and say, look, I'm going to buy you dinner,
but you just say I followed through.
And then, of course, if in particular, he also
wants the money not to go to that cause, he might agree.
And he did, in fact.
So the whole thing sort of unravels.
So you need strict friends in some ways, maybe
friends who also do it, or maybe they judge you and so on,
potentially.
But exactly, that's exactly, actually,
the type of commitment device that we're going
to talk about in a second.
OK.
So what does this paper do?
It's a very important paper in this literature by Nava Ashraf,
Dean Karlin, and Yin.
These are clients of the Philippine
Bank, randomly selected.
A subset of those were offered a commitment savings product.
What is this commitment savings product.
It was called SEED--
S-E-E-D. That's sort of just an abbreviation,
where people were encouraged to save plus had a commitment
offer, which is clients can restrict access to deposits
upon opening the account.
So you open an account, and you can
say I want to have no restrictions,
and then you have no restrictions whatsoever.
Or you can say I would like to have some restrictions, where,
for example, I can only get the money
at either a specific date.
For example, people chose Christmas, birthday,
celebration in particular, but also education,
say, for example, whenever the school
fees are due for my child.
There are also other things like vacation, travel, and so on.
So all kinds of things where essentially dates
are specific dates, where you fixed exactly a certain date.
And then there could be also goals,
where you say I want to have enough money
to be able to travel to place X. And then
once you have enough money, then you use that for travels.
So people specified date-based goals
and say that would be, say, only, like, on June 30
I can get the money, or amount-based goals,
where you say I have to save at least $1,000.
Before that, I cannot take out the money.
And the rationale for that would be
like I want to purchase a certain good
or I want to pay for certain things for my child,
and I need $1,000 to do this.
So only once I have reached $1,000 I can take out money.
And I worry that I may take out the money earlier
for other things that are not my children's education
or other types of purposes and take out the money prematurely.
And I'm not able to do that in this type of account.
Everybody clear on what this account does?
OK.
So now, what do they find?
On average, these commitment savings help people save more.
So there was about a 30% take up rate, a little bit less
than that, either for date-based or amount-based goals.
Take up here means that people chose a target
but also put in some money [INAUDIBLE]
or different savings accounts.
So they put in some money into this account,
where the money was stuck, at least for a while.
Second, offering people-- so now this is randomized.
So sorry, I should have said this.
There's a SEED treatment, and there's also
a marketing treatment.
So in the SEED treatment, people are encouraged to save.
So you say, OK, savings is great.
You should all save.
Why don't you start an account?
And this is really useful.
And savings is good for you, and so on and so forth.
So people are encouraged or nudged to save, but then also,
on top of that, got the commitment offer.
This treatment group number one.
Treatment group number two is only the encouragement
but no commitment offer.
The idea here is that, well, in the first treatment,
if you find people are doing better than in the control
treatment, maybe that's because of the commitment savings
account or maybe it's because there's also this encouragement
to save.
So comparing one and two gives you
only the effect of the commitment savings account.
OK?
So now what did they find?
So people used these accounts and put in money
and specified these goals.
Offering commitment savings, the commitment savings product,
significantly increased savings.
So people saved a lot more compared
to the marketing treatment.
This is treatment group one versus two.
And finally-- and this is a little bit in the weeds--
survey responses to "would you rather
have money now versus later," people who seem impatient
or people who really seem to need money now
seem to predict commitment take up.
This is the idea that a self-control-- if I
ask you do you want $100 now versus $120 in a week from now,
if you say $100 now, you might have self-control issues.
Or it might be really sort of a credit constraint.
That predicts whether people take out
this commitment device.
You can mostly ignore that.
But overall, what this says is essentially
is to say, offering people these devices overall
can be really helpful.
On average, people increased their savings by quite a bit.