Now we're going to talk about different ways
to increase savings.
We're going to talk about addressing
external constraints.
This is people don't have savings accounts.
And then, next, we're going to talk
about addressing internal constraints-- people find
it difficult to save regularly, for example,
due to self-control problems or people within the household.
Let me briefly tell you about the access to savings study,
and then I'm going to take a break for a few minutes.
So a first study that's a very simple and very nice
study by Pascaline Dupas and John Robinson--
Pascaline Dupas, already you know from various [INAUDIBLE]
studies from before that come across you before--
is just the question of do people not have a secure place
to save, and does that lead to a worse business success?
So these are bicycle, taxi drivers, men in market vendors,
women in Kenya, Western Kenya.
And they are asked to keep financial diaries and logbooks.
And then the research question that the authors were asking
is, do people not save because they don't have
a secure place for the money?
And does not having a secure place for your money
impede business success?
So is it, A, just not having money,
does it lead to lower savings?
And then does that have sort of downstream consequences--
sort of a version of what you're asking somewhat differently.
Does it affect people's lives in some way--
in this case, their business?
So what they do is the treatment.
So it's treatment and control-- that's a randomized control
trial--
that in the treatment group, the authors or the study team
paid for the application fee and minimum balances
for accounts at a local bank.
They go to a local bank, started a bank account.
You can put in your money there, and they pay the application
fee and minimum balances.
This is a no-interest bank account with sizable withdrawal
fees which means, essentially, the actual interest rate
is actually negative, as in if you put in 100 Kenyan shillings
and take them out a week later, you have to pay a fee.
So you get less than 100 back.
So the interest rate is actually negative.
So if you put in money here, that means,
really, you really do not have a different place
to put them the money.
That seems to be you even accept the negative interest rate.
So now what they do is then they just measure take-up--
how much money are people putting in there?
This is a CDF, a cumulative distribution function.
It's very easy-- how do we read this?
Essentially, what the y-axis shows
is the percent of people who have a certain amount saved
or below.
For example, what you see here is there--

so these are women in red and men in blue.
So you see here that, essentially, about 50%
of people for both men and women have essentially saved nothing.
They put in zero money overall.
And then you see, for example, for different amounts--
so for example, here, you see this is 60%.
So 60% of people have essentially
saved something like 200 shillings and less,
meaning that the remaining share of the people, 40% of people,
have saved at least 200 shillings.
And then these are two graphs because the axes
are very large.
But essentially, what you see here,
then, is you see the distribution for women
is much further to the right than it is for men.
That is to say, a lot of the men actually don't say very much.
Something like 95% of men save something
like less than 5,000 shillings.
So that's not very much.
When you look at women, women save a lot more.
So something like 90% of women save 50% of less-- means,
like, 10% of women save something
like 5,000 shillings or more.
And when you look at something like 10,000 shillings,
about something like--
so this is the share here-- something
like 7% of people save at least 10,000 shillings.
That is to say, a large fraction of people--
so a lot of people here at zero.
They saved exactly nothing.
They don't use this account at all.
For many people, it's actually not useful at all.
Nothing happens.
But there's a share of people in particular in women that
save a lot of money in there.
You can see here, these are people--
this is something here--
a few of these data points, essentially 40,000-50,000
shillings or more.
So some women, in particular, have a lot of money
that they save in this account.
And this, then, leads to increased overall savings.
So at the end of the study, they measure people's
overall savings, including what's in this account--
increased productive investments and increased
private expenditures.
What does that mean?
So people save more money in this account.
They have more overall savings.
Then they make more productive investment.
They invest more in their business.
And then, as a result, later, they have more money overall,
including more money for private expenditures
for their own consumption.
And that's true for some fraction of women.
So there are some of these market vendors, female market
vendors, that essentially have no safe place
to put their money anywhere.
So they prefer to put their money--
somewhere like 10-15% of women, they prefer to put their money,
and a lot of money, into these savings accounts that have no
interest but have a negative--
have a fee.
So they have essentially negative interest overall.
And that allows them to expand their business,
to invest more in their business,
to have more overall savings, and to have
higher expenditures at the end.
So that suggests there is really important barriers
to savings investments for women,
in particular market women in this context, that
seem quite important.
That doesn't seem to be the case for men.
It's not quite clear where this difference is coming from.
Perhaps it has to do with constraints
within the household, which is to say maybe
for men within the household, it's
easier to say no to things to their spouse
or to other members in the family or their neighbors
and so on.
Well, for women, it might be much harder because the husband
comes and says, I want the money now,
and then it's very hard to avoid that
without violence or other types of problems.