PROFESSOR: So how do parents choose education level
for their children?
We're not going to spend a huge amount of time on that.
But what are the types of things that a parent will
take into account when they're in that calculation, when
they think about educating their kids?

Yep.
STUDENT: Expected returns.
PROFESSOR: The expected returns, financial and non-financial.
And what else?

On the one hand, there is the return.
Lucas?
STUDENT: I think there might be some social pressure that's
there.
PROFESSOR: Social pressure could be
a reason where you pick an education level that's
not the one you want.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Whatever they can afford.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, the cost.
So it's both whether you can afford it
and whether I want to afford it.
So returns and costs are the two things that matters.
So in the cost category, you have the distance
to school, the direct cost, whether or not
there are scholarships to offset some of this scholarship.
Conditional cash transfer is, in a sense, a negative cost.
It's money that, in some countries,
in particular in all of Latin America,
some cash transfers that poor families get
are conditional on kids attending regularly.
So it creates a negative cost to go to school
because you need to go to school to get the scholarship,
to get the cash transfer.
And this can offset opportunity cost, which
is if you are not in school, you could be working, for example.
Balancing that is Astrid's point about school.
Another negative cost of school is that it's also
child care for the child.
And then the other thing is return.
So the question here you might ask is,
is it really true that people are paying attention
to the return to education?
So there, I think it's Olivia who mentioned this experience.
Do you want to talk about the back office processing
operation in India?
I don't remember it exactly.
But I think what happened was they were saying, like,
oh, if you're educated, you can work at this office.
And then the parents are educating more girls
because they saw that educating them
had some sort of direct return.
Exactly, it's exactly what happened.
So here, the puzzle is on-- the game
is like, how do we create exogenous variation, variation
that's random, in the returns to education?
And the way they did it is by saying, well, in Delhi,
all around Delhi, there are these BPO offices, or back
office processing operations.
So it's the people whom you call if you have something
you need with your credit card.
And someone calls you and says, I am John.
And I'm always like, you're not John.
And I am not Robert, either, because we each talk
with our respective accent.
In fact, once I was calling about the internet
of my friend, Rohini.
And the person on the phone tells me they are John.
And I said, and I am Rohini.
And then we both laugh because clearly, he wasn't John.
And I wasn't Rohini either.
But anyway, so these people talk to you
on the phone to interpret image, X-rays, that kind of stuff,
any work that can be done remotely.
So Rob Jensen, who is an economist now at Yale,
ran an experiment where he teamed up with a BPO
to organize recruitment campaigns
in randomly-selected villages.
Within 100km or so of Delhi.
So in order to work in the BPO, you need to be educated.
So people would realize that, oh,
there is value in educating the kids because then they
can work in this BPO.
And then what they find is that if you look at the younger
girls, even though relatively few of the older girls
went, so it doesn't create a direct income
effect for the families, but focusing on the younger girls,
their parents were more likely to keep them in school
or to enroll them in training.
They also fed them more.
Their BMI was a little bit higher.
And these kids also actually married later
and had fewer children down the line.
So this suggests that people are sensitive about return
to education.
One caveat here is that although they
are sensitive to return to education,
they are not very good at anticipating
what they might be.
So remember the Ghana experiment?
We found that the increase in probability to get a government
job was about three percentage points for the lottery winners.
Multiply that by 4 because the increase in probability
of going to school is 25%, so that's a 12 percentage point,
but the parents think that if you complete secondary school,
you're very, very, very likely to get a government job.
And as a result, they think that--
[COUGHS] excuse me.
As a result, they think that the returns to education are huge.
So do you remember the increase we found in Ghana on earnings?
More or less, what was it?
10%.
About 10%, yes, multiplied by 4 because it's
the increase corresponding to 25 percentage,
about one year of education.
That's 40%.
That's not bad for secondary.
But the parents think it's going to be 275%.
So the parents have a completely misguided view
of what the returns to education are.
And that might explain why kids are spending out in schools,
is that parents have completely bought in education
as a way of ensuring a better future to their children.
Unfortunately, these jobs are actually few and far between.
So even though you have more kids
to complete secondary school, the jobs
don't appear out of thin air.
So they are all competing for the same number of jobs.
And they are not very likely to get them.
And as a result, one of the reasons
why the effect on earnings are in fact low
is because too many children, once they graduate, wait
and hope that they could get into tertiary education
now, which now, they understand is
the ticket to a government job.
So in 2013, 43% of the control group
was hoping to get into a secondary school,
into tertiary.
So basically, the entire population
of the control group who got access to secondary school
wanted to continue.
And there is a 24 percentage point increase
in the treatment group.
In 2017, four years later, still almost 49% of them
planned to apply to tertiary.
And there is a 15 percentage point difference.
In 2019, still 36% of students of the control group
planned to apply to tertiary school.
So there is still a huge hope that something comes up
and they get access to a tertiary education
spot, which is the key, they think,
to get into the government.
And so that's a little bit-- that ends up,
this kind of looming of the government job,
not just as a way of earnings, but I
think it's Samantha who mentioned that
as a way of working a very comfy job, in a sense.
You don't have to work very hard.
And you don't have to be in the field.
And you have security and employment and all that.
That attracts.
That has so much allure that, for some of the education
graduates, it ends up going into education
for the wrong reason because of misleading opportunities,
and therefore a waste of talents.
Once these people are educated, they just
wait around and hope that they can get into government job
at some point.