PROFESSOR: So given that, why should the government pay
for schooling, or for part of education, or for all of it--
should the government pay for schooling?
Most governments have education budgets.
Should they?
And what should they pay for?
And for who?
And at what level?
And why would be a longer version of this question.
What would be a rationale for, we
don't pay-- the government doesn't pay us to buy cars.
So why would they pay us to get an education?
Angela?
STUDENT: Because, in a way, highlighting what we've seen,
not only are there benefits, but also, education
is some sort of equalizer in a sense
that it's something that shouldn't
be dependent on income because it's a baseline
to do well further on.
So if education is just left of the private market,
it starts inequalities from the start.
There's no chance that--
and it's very hard to make up for
and to get later on all the benefits
that one would get while being in school.
PROFESSOR: So that could be one of the reasons
is that it's a fairness reason, that we should--
it's just a way of limiting inequality.
So but why not give people money then?
Why force them to buy education?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Because it's not their--
because it's the parents' money, not the kids' choice.
So with a car or something, you could just
give money because kids don't drive
and that would be their choice later in life.
But with schooling, it's a parent
could affect the way their kids' life.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So that would be a first reason that there
might be a conflict between the parent and the child,
that the parent might not fully internalize
the welfare of the child and might not
take-- if you give parents enough money
to make the education decision they want,
they might or might not make the education choice
that is in the best interest of the child.
So that would be one idea that the contracting
between the family is not necessarily perfect.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, as a society, you determine it is better
to educate people than--
it becomes maybe the government's responsibilities
to have some sort of baseline for providing schooling
to people who may not afford it either.
So having it be a public good and it being net good
when most of it was said.
But you have to ethically intervene, because it's--
you determine it's better for you to get schooled.
And you're too young to have any other choice, I guess.
PROFESSOR: I agree with that entirely,
but you have to say why.
You have to say why it's better.
So and there are two reasons why it's better in your claim.
It's one is some parents might not be able to afford it.
So some parents might want the right level, the optimal level
of education for their children but not be able to pay for it.
So that's a credit constraint argument,
which in principle could be alleviated
by giving people enough money.
And the other is that the, again, it's
the contracting issues that the parent might not
make the decision that is in the best interest of the child.
For example, if to some extent the benefits of education
comes from a utility that you're getting out of it,
and you're proud of your children,
if in a particular society, parents
are only proud of educated boys, they
might not educate girls, which would certainly not
be in the interest of girls.
So the government might decide that-- or as a society,
we might decide that it's not OK.
As a society, we might decide that we want everyone
to be-- we meaning the big we.
So it means, it's only some parents
who are deciding to not educate their girls.
But the girls have no voice in the matter.
And the government intervened to--
in the middle of that.
So that would be-- that's a class of reasons.
What would be another reason why?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Maybe from a zoomed out cost perspective, it's
[INAUDIBLE] investment.
So to pay the upfront cost of getting kids educated,
then they'll avoid paying greater externalities later.
PROFESSOR: So there are two things in what you're saying.
One is the investment and one is externalities.
So on the investment side, correct, it's an investment,
but it's also an investment for the parents.
So the question is, why is the government better placed
to make this investment?
One possibility is the credit constraint.
One possibility is if the parents don't fully see the--
realize the value of the investment.
One reason why they might not fully
realize the value of the investment
is the second point you're making about externalities,
which is some of the benefits of education
we saw don't accrue to the individual or to the family,
they accrue to society at large, potentially.
For example, the [INAUDIBLE] effect
of coming back and starting a tutoring center for the kids.
From the point of view of the parents,
they don't necessarily take that into account.
Or your point about having a common culture.
Or Daniel's point about economic, political stability.
All of this doesn't enter in the calculus of parents.
Even if they had all the money that they needed,
that's not how they make decisions.
On the other hand--
yeah, go ahead, [INAUDIBLE].
STUDENT: Just going off your point,
I guess like we talked about a couple of lectures ago,
[INAUDIBLE] individual societies,
it's easier for citizens to just happen
to do the right thing passively.
It actually, depending on the implementation,
it would be an investment on the parents
through taxes or something.
It would just be a way for them to,
I guess, yeah, then to even still personally make
that investment, and all the benefits
they would realize the individual family level.
PROFESSOR: That's a great additional point.
It's another reason why you might not
get the optimal level of investment
is that it's just one more decision to take into account.
And we have so many decisions to take
that we can't get all the right decision in our mind.
So, for example, in countries like in Kenya,
where parents have to pay school fees,
school fees are always a huge reasons for stress,
just when you need to pay them.
And then, because of the inability to pay school fees
or to pay for a school uniform, some kids might drop out.
Even though their parents would have liked them to stay,
but that would have required planning
to get-- to collect the school fee,
and they're unable to do that.
They would prefer to pay a little bit of taxes every day
on their food or on--
or directly on their income and not have to pay school fees.
It does help.
It doesn't rely on the planification at every moment.
Great.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, I would think this
is super similar to the vaccines alarm clock situation.
Because each day, if school is not super urgent,
no immediate benefit could--
so I think, if it's either--
if it's free and illegal not to go, or like
school lunches or something, then it's
a lot like the vaccine center.
PROFESSOR: Yes, absolutely.
There would be an internality, even for someone
who loves their children dearly, the benefits being
in the future, but the cost being today, the cost
are always going to loom large.
And, therefore, people who suffer from this clocky problem
will tend to under-invest in education-- their own
and that of their children.
For children, for example, typically we
don't give them the choice, because on a day to day basis
it's costly to do your homework.
But then, there is some benefits in the future
that the parents is able to incorporate-- internalize
as a superego but not necessarily the child.
So we can see how it works and could work similarly
for parents as well.
Another last reason could be that--
and it's related to the fairness point--
is to the extent that education--
people are proud of education to the extent
there is a utility value that's akin to consumption.
Then education is a funny good.
Because it's at the same time an investment.
It makes you more productive.
And at the same time, something that you
enjoy for the sake of it.
And the type of things that you enjoy for the sake of it,
the richer you are, the more you can get--
the more you get.
So your car is going to be nicer if you're richer.
You're going to eat more candies if you're richer.
And you're going to go to the cinema and on vacation.
With education, likewise, as you become richer,
you might be able to afford more because you have enough to take
care of your basic necessities.
But then, as you afford more, you also
invest more in this valuable good.
So education being at the same time an investment good
and a consumption good creates a built-in unfairness
in the education choices because poorer kids will
be less educated than richer kids, therefore,
will become less productive, therefore less rich,
therefore their kid will become less productive and less rich
and so on.
So the combination of credit constraint and the fact
that, more importantly even, the fact that consumption--
that education is to some extent a consumption good
might create poverty traps where the poorer
people become poorer and poorer and the trajectory diverge.
So these are various arguments why you might--
the government might decide to finance
part or all of education.
Interestingly, all of these arguments
rely on empirical claims that we need to test.
For example, I haven't proven you
that there are these externality benefits do exist.

In practice, both rich and poor economy
tend to finance at least part of education level.
So this is the richer economy in the OECD.
And each point is the share of the education expenditure
that is shouldered by parents, at the primary level in blue,
the secondary level in green, and the tertiary level
in yellow.
So, in general, in rich economy, parents
pay very, very little of the public--
of the primary and secondary school costs.
So only parents who decide, for example,
to forego public schools and go to private school instead
need to pay.
So the level people have to pay on average is low.
And then, on the other hand, it's
when you go to university that you
start having to pay much more.
And there, too, it depends from country to country.
In France, where I come from, [INAUDIBLE]
pay very little of the cost of university.
Most universities are free or nearly free.
And in the US, of course, most universities are expensive.
And so, households pay a large cost-- a large share
of the cost of tertiary education.
In developing countries, it's more
of a mixed bag where, in general, households
pay a larger share of the cost of their education,
partly because even public schools have
school fees, partly because the public school--
people have abandoned the public schools
and go to private schools instead like we
saw for healthcare as well.
So, in general, households pay more for education
in developing countries.
So you noted that most people are in school.
And, yet, parents in developing countries
pay more for it relatively.
So that tells you how much they think education is valuable.
Another thing that's funny in a lot of developing countries
is that it is not primary education that
is relatively the cheaper for households, it's tertiary.
So you go to a system where education is expensive
the whole way through until you get to the very elite tertiary
education system where it becomes free.
So people pay a lot to basically get qualified
to go into very good schools where they
don't have to pay any more.
So that's totally regressive, meaning the richer
you are, the greater the transfer.
Because you get-- you have to pay a lot in the early level
to qualify for tertiary education,
and then you don't have to pay any more.
So that's an interesting setup of the way education system
are conceived or maybe not particularly conceived,
that the design is a bit haphazard.
And, often, it is because these tertiary schools were conceived
already in the colonial era as a way
to form an elite to run the country.
And so, they are very, very small in numbers,
but they are very inexpensive.
So people with merit get to go there.
But you can see the inequities that
are built in the system where only people who can afford
to pay primary and secondary, and therefore who are already
wealthy, get to go to tertiary for free.