
PROFESSOR: So this is for earnings.
So if you stopped at earnings, you might think, well, it's OK.
It increases-- four years of secondary school
increased education, increased earnings a little bit,
but not tremendously.
A 12% increase is maybe not that large for four years
of education.
I mean, it's for one fourth of the kids.
So for on average, one year of education.
But we can look at the other benefits now.
So part of the reason why these benefits are low
is that this financial benefit is, of course,
once the kids are educated, and they
start being in the labor market, the labor market has
to have a job for these people.
And the economy in Ghana at the time--
and now, of course, it's even worse.
But the economy of Ghana over that period
was went a little bit from crisis to crisis.
So it was perhaps not the most conducive labor market
for people to use these new skills
that they acquired in schools.
So the effect of education on earnings
is maybe less of a done deal than we might have expected.
Now, let's look at the other type of things.
One is, I think Lucas mentioned the possibility
of delayed childbearing for women.
And, in fact, this is what you find here.
The woman in the control group, at every year,
even starting in 2009 when they are still in school,
but certainly by 2013, 2015, '16, '17 are--
the women and the control group are
more likely to have had a kid--
to have started childbearing.
So if you went to school in 2018,
it means by 2013 you're 17 years old.
So you are still a teenager.
You're less likely-- you're probability to have
a child is 8% point lower if you're in the treatment
group, 9% here, 10% here.
And then it starts converging.
And by 2022, the treatment group catches up
to have at least one child, although there
are fewer children total.
So the idea that, interestingly, almost none of these children
are wanted, as people say.
Did you want to have a kid at the time?
And they're like, no.
So this is a reduction not only in the number of children
but number of unwanted pregnancy, which creates,
of course, welfare issues for the mom
and for the children themselves.
Second important result is child mortality.
So, fortunately, most of the children who were born--
so now our kids--
these teenagers are not teenagers anymore.
They almost all have children.
So we have a whole sample of children--
most of them fortunately have survived
until we observed them.
But 5% of them have died in the control group.
So you can see the survival rate at any age
is 95%, with 96% at one year and 94.9 at three years.
And that's a 5% child mortality rate.
In the treatment group, the kids is 2.4% more likely
to be alive, that means 2.4% less likely to be dead.
So it's a reduction in child mortality
by half for winning the scholarship,
so for a chance of having gone to secondary school of only
about 25% larger.
So it's a very large impact which
you start seeing at one year and starts
even more at three years.
That's by 2019.
2022, the results are similar.
21% increase in the probability that the child is alive.
And 20-- mainly driven by survival till three years.
And no impact on the boys at all.
So there is no impact on the children of the boys.
All of the impact is coming from the children of the girls.
And the third result is a cognitive scores.
So this we did with the--
working with the child psychologist at Harvard
called Liz Spelke, who is a Director of the Child
Development Lab, where they do all sorts of fun studies.
I'm going to show you some other examples of those studies
later today, where the kids are playing
all sorts of games, et cetera.
So she developed a series of child age-appropriate,
culture-appropriate, context-appropriate cognitive
tests for these kids.
And we test the kids in a very narrow age window
to control for the fact that the control kids tend to be older.
And what you see is that looking-- so we test them
either at 18 months, three years, five years, or seven
years.
At 18 months and three years, we don't see much of an effect
yet.
At five years, the students-- the kids of the winners
have a 0.3 standard deviation higher test scores.
So it's in standard deviation.
So think of moving from the median
to the 75th percentile of the distribution roughly.
And by 7.47 standard deviation-- so
think of that as moving till an even higher percentile
in the distribution.
So these are large effect.
Again, remember, it's a chance of about 25%
chance increase in the chance of completing secondary school.
So if you multiply it by four, it's
almost two standard deviation of gain for the winners.
Looking at the children of the male, zero impact.
So that's the one study on the benefits of education, which
is perhaps the most robust that I know at this point because
of the randomization taking place a long time ago
and the ability to follow the kids--
of the kids up to today, and to follow their own learning,
and their forgetting the whole trajectory of what
it is to get an education.
And you can see, if we are looking just
at the monetary benefits of education,
it might not be worth it financially
for government to finance education,
just in term of monetary benefits.
But if you now take into account the child mortality benefits
and you value each life as its price for a statistical value
of life, then it becomes a great investment
from the point of view of the government
because the cost per life saved ends up being much,
much lower than the value of a statistical year of life
as we are using in general calculation.
So it seems that-- so it becomes suddenly a very valuable
proposition to finance education.
Moreover, you can compare how much
it costs you to save a life to how much it costs you by,
for example, subsidizing immunization
with lentils or with cash, or paying for bed nets,
or paying for prophylactic treatment of malaria.
And it is more expensive, but not by that much.
It is in the same order of magnitude
to pay for scholarship just in term [? of girl ?] survival.
So including this non-earnings benefit completely
changes the story.
Of course, there is an interesting puzzle
of why it's only the mother's education that matters.
So do you have suggestions for why it's only the mother's
education that matters?

Yeah.
STUDENT: It may be they're the ones who
are primarily responsible for the upbringing of the children.
So they pass on more of their, I guess, children are at home
and they would just naturally learn from the mother more?
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So the mothers end up-- so there are several things here.
It's one, the mother end up being the primary caregiver.
And when you look at mechanism for this increase in education,
the way it works is, it's not that the kids are
more likely to be enrolled.
It's not that they live in much better material condition.
The main mechanism we seem to find
is that the caregiver is spending more time
talking to the kids, and sharing books with the kids,
and giving them permanent stimulation.
And so, that happens--
that's the educated mom.
Now, with the boys, they could go and, because they
are educated, marry a more educated mother
or woman who would become a more educated mother and caregiver.
But, in fact, they don't.
So, interestingly, when we look at the partner of these kids,
the partner of the educated girls
are themselves more educated boys than in the control group.
But the partner of the scholarship winners
among the boys are not more educated women.
So the women go for what's called
assortative matching, which is if they are more educated
themselves, their partner is also more educated,
but the boys do not.
So that's one of the reasons why it's the female parent who
is the caregiver, and educating the boys
doesn't give them access to more educated caregivers,
or they don't choose more educated caregivers.