
PROFESSOR: So now, let's spend a little bit
of time discussing of whether there
are any benefits of education.
A lot of our conversation was predicated on the fact
that our big list of benefits were in fact, benefits.
So if you look at the country level data,
it's pretty obvious that there is a strong correlation
between, for example, this is economic growth at the country
level, and how many years of education.
This is actually test scores, cognitive test scores.
You can see a pretty strong correlation between the two.
So places where people are more educated and remembered
something, because they have higher cognitive test scores.
We get the growth is larger.

We discussed also, about the non-monetary costs.
So child mortality is one of them.
You can see a very strong negative correlation
between your average years of women and the reproductive age
bracket and child mortality very, very strong.

So all of that makes, no doubt.
You mentioned politics.
You also see a correlation between whether a country is
a liberal democracy.
So Afghanistan is not one.
Australia is one.
The US is one, and how much education there
was in the 1970s.
So if in the past, a country was more educated,
today they are more likely to be a democracy.
By now, you should to be able to beware
of such cross-country correlations.
So do these graphs, showing correlation between growth
and education, between child mortality and education,
politics and education, do they necessarily indicate
the causal effect of education?
What could go wrong with them?

Lucas?
STUDENT: It could be that richer countries have more schools
and like can make schooling mandatory.
And that doesn't have any effect on their economic growth.
It's the fact that they're rich and can invest or whatever,
that actually fuels their economic growth.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it could be going backwards.
It could be that a rich country can now afford
to build all of these schools.
Or a rich country feels that even if you anticipate
future growth, you can say, well,
the country is going to grow.
So we need all these educated people.
Let's build a lot of schools.
So it could be growth that cause schooling and not the other way
around.
Or it could be an omitted variable
that countries that are better run
have better health and better schools
and better trains and better factories and grow faster.
But it's not that education, per se, causes the growth.
Yeah?
STUDENT: In the case of education,
if the externalities and the benefits we saw
were more due to proximate causes due to schooling,
would education still be considered the ultimate cause,
and thus be the causal?
PROFESSOR: I think so.
Yeah, I think legitimately, as long as it's the lever,
you can push even if it starts like a whole Rube Goldberg
machine of stuff, but at the end it causes growth, I'll take it.
So I'm not concerned about the fact
that the effect might be indirect.
But I am concerned about the fact
that some things can be many things.
So for example, you could press on the education lever,
and it presses.
And you can not press on this lever
without pressing on another one.
That also affects economic growth.
That's what we might be worried about.
Or the very fact that you can afford to press on the lever
is because you're rich enough.
So at a country level, we can make this argument for growth.
We can make this argument for politics.
Only Democratic country will want
to invest in their citizens, because why would you
want an educated citizenry if you want to remain the boss?
You might be afraid, if anything, of educated people.
So the correlation between politics and education
could well go the other way.
And of course, child mortality would
be lower in places that in general, have
good public infrastructure.
And good public infrastructure would also mean good schools.
So all for these reasons, these coalitions
are not so informative.
One could do the same thing at the individual level.
So I can repeat this the same graph at the individual level.
This is data from Indonesia.
That's actually coming from one of my papers,
which is also referenced in the book.
I'm not going to discuss much of that paper,
but here is just a descriptive estimate, which
is how much people, now it's individual adult,
how much are they making as a function of their year
of education in logs, with education for someone who has
0 year of education earnings?
These are wage earnings normalized at 0.
And then for each year, how much more they earn.
And you can see that for each year of education,
you earn a bit more.
If you finish secondary school, you earn much more.
And then, it's not clear that college is that
helpful beyond the first years.
So that's the equivalent, the descriptive correlation
at the individual level.
And then, I'm going to show you the same thing
for maternal mortality.
This is from a paper in The Lancet
that uses data from 114 countries which
have demographic and health surveys,
and compare the mortality, child mortality at different levels
in the neonatal period.
So it's a month, between one month and one year
and then until 5.
And this is the hazard of dying.
So you can see that people who are mothers,
who are the most educated, their kids are least likely to die.
And it's almost like a doubling for--

so it's almost a doubling of child mortality.
It's between the highly educated moms and the not well educated
moms.
This is relative risk.
So it's saying it's lower the bar the better.
So if a mom has zero education, this is 1.
If she has six years of education, it's moved to 0.9.
If she has 16 years of education, it moves to 0.75.
So it's a difference in 25% in the chance
of dying at one month.
Then we find also some effect of paternal.
Then essentially going here, something at five years.
Yeah, Angela?
STUDENT: Just out of curiosity, on the slide before,
the returns to education, why are they
decreasing at specific points?
Because there are-- as you would expect,
it goes up all the time.
And then it's between ninth grade and others.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so what do you think happens between 9 and 10?

I guess I need to give you one more
information about the education system in Indonesia.
You have primary school until grade 5,
middle school from 5 to 9, and then high school 10 and 11.
And then it's college.
So 10, 11, 12 is high school.
And then from then on, is college.
Yes, Evan?
STUDENT: If you're starting high school at 10, but then
for whatever reason you don't complete it,
it's like you have some other circumstance,
in your life that's preventing you
from earning that high income.
But if you complete it, your life's
probably at a pretty good track to make
the income that you expect.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, and so if we continue that, the people who
do one year of education and one year of high school and stop,
these circumstances that stop them,
they anticipate that they are the one that
continue to help them later on.
Yes, so it could be that.
So it could be that, who would stop high school after just one
year?
Is there someone who has had a problem,
maybe a health problem, maybe their parents went bankrupt,
and they couldn't pay anymore.
This problem could continue to help them in the future.
Or there could be a bad signaling effect
of being the type of people who drops out.
So in one case, it's the treatment effect,
of it's literally bad for your earnings,
because you send a bad signal of doing
just one year of education.
And in the other case, it's an event proposal,
it's the selection effect.
More generally, the selection effect
could explain a lot of this pattern, which
is the people who can afford more education can also
afford better financial circumstances for their kids.
And that's why they make more money.
So the kids could be more faster on their feet
and all that, which is helpful for education,
would be helpful in a job.
Or the kids could just be richer and have access
to more opportunities, which again, would make them better
in a job.