PROFESSOR: So today, I want to talk about education,
for the hours, for the two hours we have in front of me,
or a little less than that.

So one thing that, it might not be so obvious to you
is that, in fact, kids mostly go to school.
So the problem that we have in education
are of a different order of magnitude
and a different type of issues than we
have in health, where a lot of people in health
don't access to basic services.
In education, the COVID-19 was literally a tsunami
because the schools were the first to close and the last
to reopen in many countries around the world, not just
the US.
But before the pandemic, this is a map from 2010,
where you're seeing that if you are in the dark blue,
90% or more of the kids are enrolled at the primary level.
There are places that are not covered at all in any colors.
But of the places for which there is data on this map,
you can see that the vast majority of countries,
with exceptions of this country in the Sahel region,
have very high enrollment rate.
And this is something that has steadily improved since
the 1990's.
Even though there are more children
in the world because the population is still growing,
there are fewer children who are out of school.
And children here is defined up to a secondary school year.
So even if you go till age 17 or 18,
you now have fewer than 300 million
of children who are out of school,
when it used to be something like 370 million children out
of school.
And the kids who remain out of school
at this point, a good fraction of them
are kids who don't get a chance to attend a secondary school.
In many settings, primary school enrollment is very large.
There are not very many kids who are missing.
Then kids also go to secondary school in larger number.
And then they are-- in upper secondary school,
we are starting to lose people.
So people mostly go to school.
Kids mostly go to school.
But they are absent a lot.
So this is a map on which there is not
data for all of the countries.
But you can see the contrast.
Blue is, again, the good outcome.
And here, the red and white on this heat map
are the bad outcomes.
You can see that of the countries for which we have
data, it's the same countries, some of the same countries
have low enrollment rate.
But many more have, say, like Pakistan
here, has high enrollment rate but very low attendance.
Sometimes, less than 50% of kids on any given day
are present in school.
So kids are absent a lot.
And so they are enrolled.
But they might not go every day.
It's not the same kids who are absent all the time.
So it's not that it's fake enrollment.
But of the kids who go to school,
it's kind of on and off, on and off.
So why are kids going to school?
Let's spend a little bit of time discussing why our parents--
after all, it's parents who are sending their children
to school.
Why would they send them to school?
What are benefits that, as individuals, they
can expect their child to get from having gone to school?

STUDENT: Theoretically, a higher earning potential.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, they could make more money,
get better jobs and so on.
What else?

STUDENT: Just a greater ability to grapple with everyday things
to do, such as managing your own finances,
understanding what's around you, taking
just the right decisions.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, they might just be
better able to read instruction packages for a medicine
for their kids or put together IKEA furniture, or maybe
more relevant, figure out how to read a package of fertilizer
seeds, and therefore, as a result,
not just have better jobs, but have
better outcome in their life.
Angela mentioned one of them.
Another one could be health, for example,
that they are better able to understand health care.
We saw that it was an issue.
All right, what else could you find, could you
have as private benefits?
Yes, [INAUDIBLE].
STUDENT: It's more safe to be in school than be wandering about.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so school might be a safe babysitting option.
This is often underestimated.
But during the pandemic, we realized how important
it is to have a place where you can
park your children, absolutely.

What else could there be?

Why are you getting your college degree?
So all of these, I'm sure, are part of it.
But if you introspect on other reasons
why you decide to go to college, what could it be?

Lucas?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: Yeah, so we mentioned income increases
for yourself, and potentially later on, absolutely.
But is money the only reason why you're here?
No, why are you here, Julie?
STUDENT: More just learning and opportunity.
I feel like you would--
both, like, maybe education could give you
opportunities to go work and learn and help people and maybe
go somewhere new, or--
I don't know.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but beyond the earning potential,
you might be more likely to figure out what your passion is
and to realize yourself as an individual.
It opens opportunities.
Samantha?
STUDENT: Going off that, just like the type of work
you can do when you're educated as well.
Like, maybe a lot of the uneducated jobs
that you would get are more like field work,
or things that you wouldn't want to be doing when you have
a greater potential to have [INAUDIBLE] that's
less [INAUDIBLE] demanding or something that you're
interested in [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yes, besides the money,
you might find a job that is more interesting.
You might find a job that is less painful,
that doesn't require physical labor.
So the whole package of the job might be more interesting.
You might also find something that you never
would have found just because without going to college,
you wouldn't even know that there is
this possibility of this job.
Before going to college, maybe you
think you can just be an engineer or a doctor.
And when you come to college, you
realize there are also economics for you.

You might also just enjoy learning for the sake of it,
reading, sitting in classes, hearing people tell you stuff,
reading books, and so on, figuring out problems.
So there are potentially some private just enjoyment
of education.
And your parents are probably very proud that you
are going to school.
So that's also a benefit of education,
is that there's just a simple utility value, consumption
value of having a kid being educated and particularly
getting an MIT education, but even something similar, being
the one kid in the village that goes to high school or so on.
So those are various benefits to the individual
or their parents.
What are the additional benefits that society
might get that don't accrue directly to the individual?
So on top of all of that, of course,
all of these individual effects are also effects for society
because the individuals compose societies.
But are there effects of education over and above that?
Yep?
STUDENT: So I think it's more stable politically
because people learn to respect the government more.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So people who go to school might learn about politics.

So the exact way you phrase it is the way that [INAUDIBLE]
phrased it in a book on education, that basically,
education teaches you to be well-behaved,
to be organized citizens.
So that's very much in this stability dimension.
But you could also just learn to be curious, learn
to learn about the world, learn to be critical, and so on.
So there might be political gains,
gains about the politics.
Olivia?
STUDENT: The introduction of new industry,
like the call centers that were mentioned in the reading.
PROFESSOR: Right, so with educated people--
so how does education lead to call centers?
STUDENT: I guess they realized that there
are more jobs that were available for women
who had some sort of education.
So it was cheaper for them to have the call centers.
PROFESSOR: So is that a social benefit--
or is that a societal benefit or private benefit,
the fact that if I'm educated, I can
get the job in a call center, and otherwise not, or both?
STUDENT: I think it's both because there are
other people in their families.
Their parents might be affected by them
having a job because it might mean they
can have income [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Right, so from the point of view of the dynasty,
maybe of the family, that's still an individual benefit.
The money she makes can be then shared in the family.
On the other hand, the fact that she gets an education
might also open doors to others.
So that can be a societal effect that it spreads in this way.
Yeah, Julie?
STUDENT: Yeah, they might come back with creative ways
to help tutor or, I don't know, some new program, like,
help organize the way the town does
their finances or food or lots of things
that they might just want to help.
PROFESSOR: Right.
Lucas?
STUDENT: On the macro scale, if women are educated,
they're less likely to get married early, less likely
to have multiple children.
And so they can put more resources
into each individual child, which
lowers the burden of the government and the state
to take care of people.
PROFESSOR: [INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] the cultural identity
of the community because all the kids get to socialize
and be in the same environment.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So let me take these three points.
One, the point made by Julia, is that there
might be what economists call externalities,
productive externalities, of one educated person.
You can find them in the workplace,
for example, where one educated person can teach other people
how to use the machine.
For example, the one farmer who knows
how to read the instruction in the new seed packet
can then inform other people how to do it.
Or as Julie said, the one educated person
can come back and tutor the kids,
or can come back and help them all get immunized
or bring general life, value to the village.
Then [INAUDIBLE] point is connected.
But from a cultural standpoint, socialization
in a common ideology, common goal, common values,
et cetera, can also bring, in connection to Danielle's point,
about the stability benefits of education.
And then Lucas mentioned something
which is both a private benefit and a social benefit.
I don't think we mentioned it in the private benefits,
although it was present in Angela's comment,
is the idea that women who are educated
can have fewer children.
They might choose to have fewer children
because they have other things to do than having children.
So it becomes expensive to have children because they
could otherwise work.
They might be able to have fewer children because they
can understand contraception.
And the children that they do have,
they might be able to take better care of because they
understand how to go to the doctor,
how to deal with various ailments that they might have,
and so on.
So their kids themselves might be healthier,
might have less difficulty in school.
That's a private benefit because you like your children.
It's also a social benefit because whatever
the family doesn't take into account,
society ends up having to shoulder part of the burden.
So those are the types of social benefits
that we expect from education.
So I think we covered roughly everything
that I had on my slide, better, more higher wage, better
health, better health for children.
More educated workers can train others, fewer children
in better health, more educated voters, and so on.