PROFESSOR: So this issue that even at the individual level,
the correlation between education, and earnings,
or child mortality, et cetera might not reflect causal effect
is something which is, of course, very much
in people's minds has been the topic of a lot of studies.
In [INAUDIBLE] economics, we discuss
some of my work, which was trying to use the Indonesia
experiment to get leverage, to get
[INAUDIBLE] on whether education increases.
But what I'm going to talk about today
is a more recent project that looks at--
that actually exploits an experiment
that we conducted in Ghana, which
started before many of you were born, or all of you were born.
Which is the Ghana [INAUDIBLE] school project.
So Ghana is one of the countries where
all of these debates that we had,
discussion we had about whether or not education
should be publicly provided or not, very intense.
There is a pro secondary health, free secondary [INAUDIBLE]
school camp and an anti one.
On the pro case, it's like, oh, many kids cannot afford it.
The anti camp is saying, well, but many kids can afford it.
And if secondary high school is free,
then it's basically a transfer to all of these children,
all of these parents who would be able to pay for it.
So this is expensive and we could use the money
better elsewhere.
In 2016, they launched the pro secondary school
camp won the election.
In 2017, they launched the program.
But the debate continues to go on,
with the opposition putting it back for discussion
at every single election cycle.
Our project started before that.

So this is the effect that you're getting,
the number of kids that entered school in 2017.
But our project started in 2008, way
before secondary education was free.
And we identified a set of students
who had been admitted to specific schools.
So in Ghana, the way it works is that education
is free until the end of junior high school, so until grade 9.
And at the end of junior high school,
you take an exam, which determines whether or not
you can go to secondary school at all.
And if you can go, you're matched
to a specific public secondary school based
on your desire plus your test scores,
with a central algorithm.
So we went to a bunch of schools.
And we asked them in the first trimester of the year,
were there are any of the kids that
were admitted to the school and were
placed into that school had, in fact, gone.
And in Ghana, it's frequently the case
that people are placed in a school,
but they can't go because they don't have the money.
And they might actually join later in January,
once they managed to put the money together.
It's not uncommon.
So we went in the first quarter of the year
and identified these 2,000 students,
did a survey with them.
And then 682 of them were randomly
selected to receive a four-year secondary school scholarship.
The scholarship covers the full tuition
and the fees for these students for four years.
So they can't go to boarding school,
but all of the schools we sampled from
were these schools.
So the average cost is about $500 per child.

That's roughly the timeline.
In 2008, they wrote their exam.
In May 2008, they wrote their exam.
July 2008, they graduated.
In August, they were admitted.
In September, the school year starts.
By December, they were sampled.
If they are not enrolled yet, in January,
they were randomized into treatment and control.
And if they were eligible and they wanted to go,
they could go.
If they were not eligible but found some other money,
they could also go, so if they didn't win the scholarship.
So it's not randomizing senior high school.
It's randomizing a chance to--
an extra chance to go to senior high school.
By 2012, if they had never repeated the class,
they could graduate from senior high school.
And from then on, we continued to sample them, actually now,
till 2022.
We are still following them.
So the first result is in order for this
to be interesting from our point of view
because we want to use that to look
at the benefits of education.
I cannot compare the educated and uneducated
because, obviously, even within the educated and uneducated are
different.
Because some kids who didn't get a scholarship still
found a way to pay for school.
And those kids are different.
So we are going to compare all the outcomes in the lottery
losers, also about 1,400 kids, to the lottery winners.
So the first thing I need to show you
is to show you that, in fact, the lottery winners are
more likely to attend school.
And this is what we find.
You can see that the lottery losers, still, 45% of them
managed to graduate secondary school,
suggesting that they found the money from elsewhere.
So they might have found another scholarship.
The employers of their parents might come up.
Or their family might pull the money together.
So about half of them, even though they were not
enrolled for lack of money in the first trimester,
found their way to secondary school.
But for the kids who got the scholarship,
it increased by 28 percentage points.
So if you add 45% to 28%--
you're better at arithmetic than me-- that's almost 83, 83%.
So 83% of the lottery winners do go and complete
secondary school.
So that's people who were very happy to get this and took it
and went to school.
But 45% would have done it anyways.
OK?
Make sense?
So this is for the boys, for everyone.
And this is very similar for the boys and for the girls.
The boys are more likely to go to school anyway,
50% versus 40%.
But the differential effect is the same.
So on average, the losers have completed
about two years of education, that correspond to about 40%
of the four-year education, so the people who go complete.
And the winners have about a little
over a year extra education.
Does that make sense?
[INAUDIBLE], you look puzzled.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].

PROFESSOR: Now we can look at the different--
so this was the impact of secondary education
up till the secondary level.
Now let's look at tertiary education,
so whether people go to university.
And now I'm showing you the mean here of the treatment group.
So by 2019, 15% of the students have ever
enrolled in a tertiary program, so universities,
or teacher training college, or nurse training college,
in the control group.
So 15% of the students have gone to a tertiary.
So if you remember that about 40% of them
have gone to school, it's about 1
in 3 among the one who completed senior high school.
And there is an extra 4 percentage
point among the lottery winners, which is entirely due to girls.
So the girls are less likely to go to tertiary school
in the control group, but they have a larger treatment effect.
So 12% of the girls in the control group go to school.
And 18% of the girls in the control group
go to school, 12 plus 7.
Makes sense, 12% plus 7%, 18%?
For the boys, it's 18% plus nothing, 0.005.
So it's also 18%.
So basically, the scholarship allowed girl
to catch up in term of tertiary education.
Ah, I forgot to add something very important.
It's whether or not they learn something at school.
So we administered, in 2013, tests based loosely
on the PISA test, which is used across the entire OCD
to measure what people know in math,
and science, and language.
And we find significant improvement in how much
they know after four years of education, which is reassuring.
They are more likely to complete secondary school.
They've learned something in secondary school.
Interestingly, we found this even people
are assigned to-- their schools are assigned by category.
They are the top school, the middle school,
and the not very good schools.
Even in a not very good school, they still
have positive treatment effect.
So all of these schools increase the stock of knowledge
by about 0.25 standard deviation of the test scores.
Now, we talked about benefits of education.
One benefit could be better jobs, different type of jobs,
and higher earnings.
And the other benefits are in terms of child health
and all of that.
So in order to see the benefits in terms of earnings,
we had to wait till the children become young adult
and start working.
So for this project, you had to be very patient because first
they had to finish school.
And then we have to continue to follow them, and follow
them, and follow them, and follow them.
And if I had taught this class to you
even last year, I would have told you
I do not find an effect, a difference
in the earnings of the kids.
By 2022, we do find that people among if we
take all kids, people in the treatment groups
are earn 300 Ghana cedis more on the basis of 2,600,
so a little over 10% more, closer to 12% more,
than people and the control group.
Until 2022, the impact were not significant.
So finally, by 2022, they earned more money, but it's about 12%
more, corresponding to four years of education.
So it is not a gigantic rate of return to education,
on average.
What is interesting, though, is you
see that they are more likely to have a job with benefits,
so more likely to be employed with a pension, and health
benefits, and so on, and in particular, more likely
to be working for the government.
So for the mean in the control group is about 8%
of the children.
[INAUDIBLE] adults now work in the government.
And in the treatment group, it's moved to 15%--
sorry, 12%, from 8% to 12%.
So that's a 50% increase.
But the probability was low to start with.
So in percentage point, that's not very large
it's a large increase but in percentage point.
It's not very large.
So most of the earnings.
And then you also see that people are less
likely to be self-employed.
So the self employment rate is 36%
in the control group and move to 30% in the treatment group.
So what we seem to have is people
shifting from more insecure type of jobs
to more secure type of job, but not in huge numbers.
And for everyone else who doesn't do this shifting,
it doesn't make a big difference in how productive they are
or how much they earn, which is why, on average, the earning
effects are not that large.