PROFESSOR: So I'm going to stop here and take questions now
for the rest of the talk.
[INAUDIBLE]
TA: We have a question from [? Biraj ?] [? Bisht. ?] Could
you talk a little bit more about examples where the tyranny
of curriculum does not exist or is not as severe?
For instance, you mentioned Finland.
How did they structure their curriculum?
Basically, are there any best practices around this problem?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So Finland is a great example of no tyranny of the curriculum.

So kids stay in kindergarten until they are 7.
They start learning to read only at age 7.
And therefore, most of them are ready.
That's number one.
Number two, when kids--
there is a software they're using in all of the schools
to teach early reading that was originally developed
for kids with dyslexia and now is
used for older kids, which is an extraordinarily progressive.
Starts from really the basics of phonics, and that kids
do every day for a while, and then that
help the kids progress at their own level
because it's moved them to the next step
once they are already ready for it.
So constant reinforcement.
Number three, Finland has a lot of human resources
in the school--
many people who are available to provide
individual level of attention to kids in small groups by level,
and so on.

TA: Can you talk-- this is a question from [? Akina ?]
[? Shibuya. ?] Can you talk a bit more about changing
the minds of education bureaucrats?
Presumably you are going around them
by supporting non-governmental projects
because it's too hard to change the curriculum itself.
Is that right?
PROFESSOR: No, I spent most of my time trying
to work with school systems for reasons that I explained.
That being outside of schools, there are not enough kids
there.
So I spent most of my time trying to work through schools.
I'm not doing that alone.
I'm doing that with local actors, in particular Pratham.
But Pratham is mostly acting in very close tandem
with the school systems, both in India and elsewhere.
And the convincing is interesting it's complicated
because there's this idea that you basically there
is the idea that if you make the curriculum simpler, you are--
I don't know-- disrespecting the children
or selling them something less good
than what they are entitled to and that the way in which you
show that you are on the side of the children
is by having this very ambitious curriculum and lofty plans.
So there is no ill will I don't think,
but just a lack of understanding of how it reflects
to the reality on the ground.
Then where we get the most success usually
is when there is a local champion,
for example a district education officer or a state.
Sometimes at the level of the state,
but if it's at the level of the state,
it needs to go back down to the district.
That can, then, in turn, convince people,
convince the bureaucracy, the school inspectors, et cetera.
We've had-- this is, I think, the really fundamental shift
that happened that shifted from in-school model of remedial
learning to be unsuccessful to successful
is when we realized that we had to train the inspectors,
and that the way-- now, every program that Pratham does,
they first get Pratham bureaucrats to train them.
And they send them to schools, and they
send them to try, et cetera.
And then you have a force of people
that's much more likely to actually implement the program.

TA: We have a question from Mariel Bedoya.
So you talked mainly--
you talked about the main problem of curriculum.
If you had to weigh the contribution of all
of the problems, you sort of touched
on-- curriculum, teachers, infrastructure,
health of students, incentives, et cetera.
To explain the learning gaps between developing
and developed countries, what weight would you put to each?
PROFESSOR: I think I made it pretty clear that I
don't think anything explains things as much
as the curriculum.
It's the combination of the curriculum
and the way that the incentives that it gives you down the line
to everyone in the system.
TA: A question from [? Garima ?] [? Agarwal. ?] Could a possible
strategy for getting parents to support programs like Mindspark
be spending some time helping kids do better on the formal
school curriculum in addition to the treatment, i.e.
Teaching at the right level?
Anecdotally, this seems to be an informal solution
many motivated teachers at public institutions use.
PROFESSOR: So that's a great idea,
but the problem is that you can't teach people
nuclear physics until they know how to count.
And the Mindspark system doesn't stop the kids at the lower
level, but it only makes them progress
when they have the understanding that they need in order
to move forward.
And you couldn't reproduce the same error
of the school curriculum.
If you said, well, fine, they don't yet
know how to do subtraction, but since they are in grade eight,
it's absolutely essential that they
can solve this very difficult division problem.
So I'm going to also try to teach them that algorithm.
And the problem you have when you
do that is that you have this half-baked, half-understood
algorithm that confuses kids.
And this is exactly what we're seeing in the Market
Math, where you're trying to do that,
and the kids are unable to-- once you present things
in the school format, the kids are
unable to do things that they actually know how to do.
So that's the danger of trying to skip ahead
or something like that on top of teaching
the foundational skills.
So the Mindspark system is set up
to take the kids all the way where they need to be,
but you need to start from where they are.
And there is no time in the sessions--
in the limited time in the session-- that it's
left outside of the school day.

TA: Another question from Jose Pinilla.
Are there any potential drawbacks to displacing
the official curriculum?
Do we have any evidence on long-term impacts
of in-school implementation of teaching at the right level?

PROFESSOR: That's a great question.
So I doubt.
Because unless-- what we are seeing the result
of the curriculum--
I doubt that there are big drawbacks,
because we are seeing the result of the curriculum now.
I didn't show you some evidence that for the learning
of older kids--

from time to time, the [INAUDIBLE] report is on older
kids--
and then it teaches them some very simple kind
of life questions.
Like, if you have a packet of cleaning solution that's
for 20 liters, and then you need to do 40 liters,
how many packets should you use?
And kids are terrible at these questions.
It's even worse than at the formal math questions.
And even the kids who can do the formal math
can't do these problems.
That echoes exactly what we found in the Market Math
problems, where the kids in school who could do division
couldn't do the Market Math problems.
They did them badly.
And even if they managed to do them,
it took like them 20 minutes to give people
the change, which is, of course, not practical.
So I don't think that what is being taught now is
particularly useful for people's--
either at giving people the foundational math that
would allow them to go further, or the foundational reading
abilities that would allow them to go further,
or in teaching them skills that would be useful in their lives.
So I don't see the drawback of replacing that
by actually doing something that did either of these two things.
That said, to my knowledge, there
haven't been long term impact of [? tile ?] programs.

TA: I Have another question from Pradeep Chaudhry.
When you are connecting curriculum
with learning outcomes, is it about the curriculum
and its design or the pressure on teachers
in completing the curriculum.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So that's both, but they go hand in hand.
If you had curriculum but they were just suggestions,
it might be fine.
But all of the pressure and the incentive system
is on completing.
For example, in India, under the right to Education Act,
teachers are compelled by law to complete the curriculum.
And in other systems--
for example, in Kenya, in Ghana, in Tanzania, in Uganda--
where there are school leaving exams.
Teachers and schools are ranked by how many kids managed
to do well at the school leaving exam, which again, is related
to completing the curriculum and paying attention
to the top of the class, who has the ability
to actually complete it.

TA: We have a question from [? Ebenezer ?] [? Kondo ?]
specifically about your research in Ghana.
Have you done any validation studies
to further support your initial findings?
Currently, in Ghana, a new curriculum
has been introduced at the basic school level,
but no accompanying textbooks for teachers
to effectively deliver.
What impacts do you envisage this
could have on the quality of education in Ghana?
PROFESSOR: I'm not exactly sure what you refer to
by validation study.
The study we did was among secondary school kids-- so much
older children.
And it was randomized.
Kids were randomized in 2008 and given scholarships
to attend secondary school.
And then we have been following them ever since,
but we haven't done a second study
doing the same thing again.
So we just have this one cohort.
I don't-- I've made a successful career not to make predictions
on what could happen when something does something,
so I'm not going to predict what could be the impact
of the program of not having the textbooks that go with the new
curriculum.
But one would think that it could
be helpful to have some complement.
TA: A question from [? Hijab ?] [? Tahir. ?] Given the lag
between research and policy implementation are there
strategies for schools to measure the existing knowledge
post pandemic and then alter curriculum plans accordingly?
PROFESSOR: That's a great question.
I really wish.
And we've been trying to advocate in this direction.
It doesn't seem very high on anybody's mind right now.
As one of the things that is really striking,
this pandemic in developing countries
is how the schools were not very high on anybody's mind.
And to rethink now how we are going
to accompany kids who are coming with these very
different experiences would be pretty critical.
And I don't think it's happening on a very systematic basis
right now.

Education is highly positively correlated with other good things like income and health. Why is this not proof that increasing education causes increased income and health?



Education and these other outcomes are difficult to precisely measure, and the number of countries in the world with reliable data for these measurements is fairly limited, so we have too small of a sample to come to any firm conclusions.

There may be another “omitted” variable that is responsible for increasing both education and income or health.

The causation may be reversed: increasing income or health may cause increased education.


True or false? At least in Ghana, parents underestimate potential benefits of education because they fail to take into account the value of qualifying for a government job, which explains why so few attend secondary and tertiary school and also explains the high rates of absenteeism discussed at the beginning of this lecture.



True

False


Which of the following describes the basic principle behind Teaching at the Right Level?



Teachers should be provided with adequate teaching materials (books, chalk, etc.) and other resources to be able to teach effectively.

The number of students per teacher should be reduced in order to increase the amount of one-on-one instruction received by each student.

Students should be taught material according to their level of knowledge, not according to their age.

The most talented students should be identified early so that they can receive special attention so that they can reach their full potential.




