PROFESSOR: In the last 20 minutes,
I want to talk to you about education quality.
Because I have told you about the fact
that kids are in school, I have told you about the fact
that they are absent, but I haven't told you much
about what they were learning.
In fact, the one slide about what
they were learning done on the Ghana study,
I didn't even show you.
And the problem is that they don't learn very much.
This is data for India, so let me remind to you
the same thing we saw in India.
Almost everyone is enrolled.
97% of kids in the age 6 to 14 are enrolled in school.
But the presence rate is not that large.
So in the north of India, you have 50% to 59%
of children present.
In the south, it's higher.
And the problem is that they are not learning very much.
So this is data from up till 2016.
It didn't get better after that.
And of course, then, there was a pandemic.
So it got worse temporarily.
But you have to remember one thing about the education
quality in India, and it's not very different in the rest
of the developing world.
About half of children who are completing
grade 5 who are aged--
who are in grade 5 are able to read at the grade 2 level.
So about half of the children can read a simple paragraph
and make sense of it.
So that's not a very good performance
for an education system.
In arithmetic, maybe closer to the MIT student mind.
In standard 5, half of the children
can do without mistake these two-digit subtraction
with carry over.

26% can do a division by a single digit.
See the funny sign for division?
Only 26% of them can do a division like that.
Even by the end, they finish grade 8, only 44% of the kids
can do this division.
So the education system doesn't produce very much at all.
Just so you don't think it's just India,
a team at the World Bank put together
a very nice data set combining many, many, many, many test
scores and putting them on a single dimension.
So what they do, basically, is take common test for example,
the test I showed you for reading
and mathematics is called the ASER test in India.
Pratham in India has done it for many years.
So many countries do the ASER test and do other things.
So you can use the ASER as a crosswalk
to put all of the test roughly on the same magnitude
to have a unified measure of what children
know at a given point in time.
And what you see is that it's very strongly
correlated with income level of the country.
So in a poorer country, learning levels are very low.
So India is not particularly bad compared
to other poorer economy countries in Africa, DRC,
Ghana, Togo, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Yemen,
are all even lower, are poorer, on their achievement level
are even lower.
So if you think of India as half the kid can read,
half of the kid who finished primary school
can read at the level of the beginning of primary school,
in Cote d'Ivoire, that's closer to 0.
Very, very low achievement level.
So that is a problem that now is vastly recognized.
There is an emphasis in organizations like the World
Bank or USAID on the quality of education
and on learning outcomes.
And it's important, of course.
However, some sense the problem is even worse, because not
only schools are not teaching very much,
they are also not able to recognize, to certify,
and to leverage knowledge that is there in the system.
So let me give you two examples of that, both from my work.
One is work that I did with Liz Spelke, my friend, psychologist
at Harvard.
And in fact, both of them are joined with her.
But one is an experiment.
So what we did, what Liz does is mostly to try to think how
and to understand how little kids learn mathematics,
and it turns out that all children,
barring extreme disability, have intuitive
knowledge of mathematics before they
are exposed to any symbols.
So for example, you can compare more or less,
you can compare-- you can do some visual form analysis.
If I show you graphs with all of the lines
are parallel, and one, they're not,
you intuitively will know that the one where they are not
is different, even if you have never heard of a parallel.
Or if I show you different shapes with different number
of sides, you will know how they are different, and so on.
So that's one thing we know.
Second thing we know is that kids who in childhood are
better at this kind of test also are better
at math down the line.
They get a better SAT score in mathematics.
What we don't know is whether training--
we also know that this intuitive knowledge of mathematics
can be trained.
What we don't know is there is a causal effect-- is there
a causal effect of training intuitive mathematics
on later performance, or it just happens
to be an omitted variable that the kids who
are good at informal mathematics are also
good at formal mathematics.
So I contacted Liz several years ago
because I was interested in seeing whether we could help
the kids do better in school by sending them
to an excellent preschool and teaching them stuff
to get them ready in preschool.
So based on what she knew about the importance
of this intuitive knowledge, she designed
a curriculum of math games.
I'll show you some examples.
Then we did a study where we first did
some baseline, then we--
they played games for about three months,
and then we had several end lines, one
after six months, one after one year, one after 18 years,
and we did one, completed one after five years recently.
So the games are that kind of games.
For example, you have a red basket
and a blue basket and a card, and you have
to put it in the right place.
Bravo, Julie, 1 point.
Julie.
Tada!
So this is correct.
This one goes here.
If you turn the card back, it gives you the answer.
And it actually also gives you a numerical representation,
so, certainly, there is a bit of numerical numbers.
So that's one example.
Another one is this visual form analysis
that's much harder to figure out which is-- here, you have
to say, what's the odd one out?
What's the one that doesn't belong with the rest?
You don't know, so I'm going to guess that it's this one.
No, it's not this one.
So you have a guess, now I had my guess.
The middle top.
Yes.
We get the smiley face.
So there's this kind of games.
There is a sort of race to the top.
And then, so the series of math games
like that of progressive difficulty,
not introducing numbers.
And then, we add social games, which
have exactly the same structure, but they are all
about emotions.
For example, this one, who is happier in here?
And this one, who is the odd one out?
So the odd one out is that one because she looks grim
faced when the other one are happy.
So why did we introduce this social game?
Why do we have just-- why don't we just
compare math game to control?

Yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: Precisely.
Because it's a set of very informal preschool,
in the absence of math game, they might not do very much,
or maybe they might do great things
and we are taking them from these great things
with the math games.
The point is that for a while, they're
playing these games where their wheels are cranking
in a particular fashion, and we want
to make sure that it's the effect of that
and not something else.
That's why we had the social games.
So here's the first finding.
The first finding, before we even do the experiments,
is that the kids progress in the games at the same speed
at the kids in Cambridge who are children of graduate student
and assistant professor and postdocs at Harvard who
are testing these games-- whom these games were piloted for.
So the kids in India, these very poor kids in slums in Delhi,
they learn and like those games just as well.
That's the first finding.
The second finding is that they, by doing that,
they become much better at this non-symbolic sort of tasks,
and it's really the effect of the math.
This is compared math to control.
It's much larger difference than comparing a social game
to control.
And these effects are actually quite persistent.
Even 18 months later, they are still
better at this non-symbolic math.
The third one is, while they were still in preschool,
there is a small effect also on symbolic mass,
so the ability to recognize numbers
and to say what is-- to recognize shapes, for example.
But the third fact is that at later end
line, once they have reached schools,
this is completely gone.
So once they go to school and they
are supposed to start really learning those numbers
and shapes and all that, there is
zero impact of the experiments.
Which means that although the math game really
enhance their ability to understand and think
about math, once they went to school,
the schools basically squashed it out of their system
very quickly.
So the first conclusion is that, well, it
was not a success from the point of view
of having an intervention that really helps
the kids, because it doesn't help them
once they get to school.
But the second conclusion is that schools are not
able to leverage this increased mathematical ability.
Schools basically continue to move on.
The fact that they have kids who know a bit more math to start
with, should have more ability on math,
they are not able to do anything with them.