PROFESSOR: We still want to continue working on it.
But that's hard.
And that's not really something economists have much
to say about.
Unfortunately, they are not the people
who are kind of listened to on this subject.
So you can't give up on the schools
because that's where the kids are.
You can't reform them wholesale because they are not
willing to do that.
So what?
You could work on the margins.
Some part of the systems are much more open
than the schools themselves.
One margin is tutoring.
So many kids are involved in tutoring
on top of being in school.
This is widespread around the world, where kids go to school
and then they attend tutoring.
And whatever learning is happening
is happening during their tutoring session.
And there, of course, it's like a free for all.
So the tutoring sessions is where, for example, you
could have computers that teach kids better.
And this is what was tried with the Mindspark program.
Another margin is completely different schools.
So in India, in Uttar Pradesh, schools don't teach anything.
But on the other hand, the good thing
is they are happy to be replaced by anybody.
So that creates a margin.
Another place is preschool, where
there is not much of a view yet of what needs to be done.
And so this is an area where there is a lot of possibilities
to propose something that's on good quality,
so that kids are actually-- even the poorest kids arrive
in school just as ready for what the school system is
going to throw at them.
And therefore, they don't get lost at the beginning
and don't get lost very early on.
Even the early grades, grade one and two,
might still be fine because the curriculum there is still
acts on the very basic things, reading, writing,
basic numeracy.
And therefore, all the activities
that can be proposed to help kids to learn to read and write
are actually very well received by teachers.
Because they see this as achieving--
helping them to achieve what they want to achieve anyway,
which is to teach the curriculum.
So there is a whole spectrum of early years between grade three
and--
between the age of three and the age of seven or eight,
which is a very open margin where
the advances from cognitive science, the experiments coming
from the field can be kind of aggregated into something
that would work well.
The summers are another margin.
They are very long.
Kids learn-- lose a lot.
So here is an example of doing that.
You remember the first experiment
I showed you about preschool mathematician that
was successful in teaching kids to intuitive mathematics,
but not successful to--
was not leveraged by the schools.
So what we decided to do in a second experiment
is to still continue to work in preschools
but add a formal component to it, so symbolic games.
And so now we compare conditions where
we are teaching only nonsymbolic math to a condition where
we are teaching symbolic math and then a condition
where so nonsymbolic only, symbolic only, mixed,
and no treatment.
And what we find here is that when you have mixed,
you're learning just as much by inline one, by inline two,
and by inline three, in term of nonsymbolic skills.
And then in term of symbolic skills, you are learning more.
And in fact, it continues even.
1 and 1/2 year later, the gain in symbolic skills
is still there in the mixed scheme.
So it seems that by combining the same duration of time,
nonsymbolic and symbolic games, you don't lose anything
on the nonsymbolic learning.
And you gain something on the symbolic learning.
So kids are actually learning better once they are in school.

So armed with this model, what did we do?
Well, we tried to put in place a scalable model that
could be played with kids with a lot of autonomy
after an initial introduction by the teachers
in those early years in government schools,
which for kindergarten and grade one teachers.
The cards emphasized the base 10 structure of the number system
and the equivalence between 1-10 and 10-1,
allowing-- teaching people to-- teaching kids
to learn that which are fundamental skills in grade
one.
The kids were able to play alone.
They played competitively across groups.
They understand the games very well.
And what we find here is that that led to a strong impact
on symbolic math outcomes, both for kindergarten
and for grade one students.
So this was a very good result. And it
suggests that it's something that we are now
working on scaling it up, both directly through the schools
and then through nongovernment actors in many states
to make the kids ready for whatever is ready for them
by working in that kindergarten, grade one margin.
The only worry was that.
So I think this is hugely promising.
And that's kind of the area where
I spend most of my time on now.
The only worry is that the temptation to close this margin
as it expands.
So whenever you have the reason why the margin is open
is, to some extent, because nobody has paid attention yet.
But once everyone starts realizing that, oh, preschool
is important, the worry is that you start setting up
a curriculum for preschools.
And you regulate it away.
And then you might suddenly find yourself
with the same problems.

So what's the ultimate strategy?
I would say it's patience.
It's realizing that there is not going to be
a silver bullet, ultimately.
But we will need to continue to engage with the school system
as it is, however frustrating.
The good thing is we exactly know what needs to be done.
When it's possible to teach and prepare the kids, number one.
Teach them at the right level once they arrive, number two.
So the challenge now is more of a political economy.
Organizational problem is to exploit all the existing wedges
and pry open new ones at every opportunity.
I think the pandemic actually could be an opportunity
or could be a complete disaster.
It could be an opportunity if the school system realizes
that the kids are coming back with even more differences
in their levels.
It could be a disaster if they don't and they
continue to try to shove the curriculum to them.
But any of this effort leads to real gains,
even if they don't lead to a revolution.
And these gains are multiplied by millions and millions
of children.