PROFESSOR: So that's the problem,
is if that indeed is the problem, that teaching is not
at the right level, that the curriculum leaves many children
behind, that teachers feel that it is their job
to teach the curriculum.
So in many countries, it actually is their job.
It is part of their job description
to complete the curriculum, while it might not
be part of their description to make sure
that any children actually reach there.
That means that if children start
losing track early on, say, because they reach
grade three, for example, without knowing to read yet,
nobody's going to teach them to read now because now,
by grade three, things are already established.
And you are supposed to be learning to do
other things with your reading.
And kids can be hopelessly lost forever and will not
learn to read and will not learn other things.
And that's kind of what we are finding here.
If that's the problem, then it means that one can really
make significant gains in schools
by abandoning a uniform curriculum that's
based on age, with automatic promotion,
as we discussed earlier, in favor of a system
that where you have teaching at the right level,
so [INAUDIBLE],, where kids are regularly assessed
using very simple tools.
Then they are grouped by homogeneous
learning level in groups.
And then they start by getting foundational skills
appropriate to the level where they are now.
And then kids are constantly reassessed and moved
to the level as they progress.
This is a program that was the brainchild of Pratham, which
was created by Dr. Madhav Chavan,
quickly joined by Dr. Rukmini Banerji,
initially with UNICEF funding in Bombay
and then moving to now serving millions of children
all over other countries and [INAUDIBLE] in the rest
of the world as well.
Pratham has long been a partner of [INAUDIBLE] and my group.
So we've had a chance to evaluate
using randomized evaluation, several iterations
of the Pratham model.
And here is a timeline of the project.
So first of all, we were able to directly evaluate the program
in urban areas, in '21, '23.
So it's kind of teaching the ancestor of the teaching
at the right level program.
Then in rural areas, in Uttar Pradesh,
and then in the summer camp in Bihar,
and then in school teacher-led learning improvement, and then
a program in Ghana that was replicating
some of the models of tested here,
tested in 2005, 2006, and then another teacher-led model
in 2012, 2013, and then finally, another learning camp,
which is more of a taking over of the schools for a period
of time in 2013, 2014.
So I show you this long timeline to explain
how it takes a long time to go from long time and a lot
of iteration, to go from a proof of concept, which probably we
had in '21, '23 with the evaluation of the [INAUDIBLE]
program, to a program that can be scaled up, both in India
and the rest of the world.
So what we find when we have Pratham staff or volunteer
in school is huge gains.
And this is the last program over here.
And-- sorry, let me just go back to the timeline
and explain to you.
So we first found big gains of the program,
both in rural and urban areas.
And then Pratham got involved in the scale up of this program
through government partnership.
And we were interested in testing the scale up version.
One possibility of the scale up are summer camps,
where the government teacher teach,
but outside of their normal curriculum approach.
One possible approach is to teach the teachers
to implement these strategies inside the schools itself.
They adopt, in principle, benefits and drawbacks
of both methods.
The benefits of the in-school model
is that these kids are already there.
So you might as well teach them when they are there.
Whereas in summer schools, you have to kind of hunt for them.
They are not very0-- they are not necessarily all coming.
In fact, many of them do not come.
The disadvantage, however, is that in the school,
in the model where teachers try to teach inside the school,
it competes with their other activities.
And in fact, what we found in our first 2008,
2010 experiment is that the summer school model
worked very well, showing that the teachers are perfectly
able to teach when it's the only thing they have to do,
even though they have to chase the children.
But an in-school model didn't work at all,
partly because the teacher just didn't implement it.
And why didn't they implement it?
Well, we conducted a detailed focus group with them
and they told us, look, I really like your activities,
but I have to complete my curriculum.
I have no choice.
So that led to a rethinking about how
to make the program work.
And basically, the idea is that you either have--
if it's going to be run by teachers,
two things have to happen.
First of all, they have to really understand
that this is their job, that this is not something
they have to do on the side, that the government really
wants them to successfully implement the program.
And second of all, they have to be
given some space in the school day or the school
years to do it.
So this is what we tried in Haryana,
but with two changes on the program.
One is to have the cadre of inspectors to start by training
themselves and trying themselves so that they could be,
effectively-- these are the supervisors of the teachers--
convey that this is what the teacher should be doing,
and that they can do it, and how to do it.
And secondly, to create a space in the day-- so
it was a special hour that was entirely
devoted to these activities, and nothing else
could be done there.
The other possibility is to just--
and in settings where schools are very dysfunctional, works
very well, is to just have Pratham go into the schools
and run learning camps.
And both of these models are extraordinarily effective.
Given that, it took some time to arrive at programs
that can be scaled up.
And now they are being scaled up, teaching at the right level
today reach millions of children--
or, reached millions of children before the pandemic in India
and in India and is now spreading
in several countries in Africa under Pratham leadership, which
is a great example of an innovation spreading
from South to South.