PROFESSOR: The success of Pratham
and the success of the teaching at the right level
is both instrumental.
And it also tells us that--

meaning that it leads to a good policies that
can be scaled up in other places and hopefully
will improve learning level.
But it only improves learning level to some extent.
And in particular, one of the things
that we struggled with in the scale up of the program
both in India with the teachers, for example, and sometimes
with policymakers is, a certain resistance
to sort of waste time in away from the curriculum
to go back to the basics in grade 3 and 4.
So the idea that you would go back to teaching, reading,
and very simple math to kids in three and four, people still
implicitly or explicitly consider
that it's a bit of a waste of time,
and that there should be-- they don't have time
and should highly be working on the curriculum.
So these are really constant persuasion efforts.
And you arrive to-- you succeed to an extent, and that's good.
But you might ask yourself, can more be
done to fix primary education?
So one radical solution is to just give up on the schools.

Pratham's mission originally was "every child in school."
Then they added, "every child in school and learning."
Then they added, "every child in school and learning well."
And sometimes now, when you talk to Madhav Chavan,
he's wondering whether they need every child in school even,
and whether the learning should be outside of schools?
And in fact, there are many efforts now--
and this was accelerated with the pandemic--
of getting learning to the kids outside of the schools
without trying to be mediated by the school.
And one thing that has really helped there
is the advent of digital technologies--
cheap tablets that have, video content that
be given to the schools.
You're going to spend some time with [? Kartik ?] discussing
the great potential of these digital technologies
in particular in adapting the level in sort of mechanically,
automatically adapting the exercises
to the level of the kids.
So getting sort of embedded teaching at the right level.
So this is very satisfying because, for example,
with the studies of this program,
Mindspark, a software program used in tutoring lessons,
led to really, really large impact
in a way that is, in principle, quite sustainable because this
is done outside of the school using computers,
so that can be supervised with by pretty much anybody.
The computers and tablets are now extraordinarily cheap.
The software is a huge fixed cost.
The marginal cost is essentially zero so
that you can really make great progress.
The issue is that schools continue
to have the monopoly to test and to legitimate knowledge.
And therefore, the fundamental approach
was giving up on the schools is that kids go to school.
Parents have agreed to do that.
97% of kids are enrolled.
Parents recognize the legitimacy of the school system.
Anything else requires them--
require us to convince them to show up.
So the first India program was not the [INAUDIBLE] program
that was tested in Gujarat, but the second one in rural areas
was tested out of school.
So kids had to come to two special camps out of school
for a couple of hours a day.
And they were absolutely spectacular effects
on very few kids.
So the average effect for the community were very positive,
but it was driven by the fact that the kids who went
really benefited from it.
So you think that kind of a bit of a waste.
Where you have 100% of the kids in school,
you would like to find something that works for them.
Another issue that you're going to find
in the study of the Mindspark, which you'll see a bit later,
is that at the end of the day, the test scores, although they
were enormous, didn't bring the kids to grade level
and therefore didn't really impress parents
that it could help with passing exams.
And there was very low willingness
to pay for the program by parents
once it was not free anymore.
And that's an issue.
I'm going to not spend too much time on that
because you're going to see it with Karthik.
But there was really this huge contrast between huge gains
here, where you really have--
here are the gains, tremendous gains.
0.67 standard deviation.
In math, 0.44.
In Hindi, it's very spectacular.
But no gain on school exams.
And therefore, no parent interest, and the program
had to stop.

And the problem is--
it's very related to what happened in the private schools
and why the private schools don't
have an ambiguous positive impact, even though they
are cheaper for what they deliver,
which is already good in and of itself--
is that parents continue to buy into the obsession of elitism.
The schools, for many parents, is
valuable for the possibilities it opens up.
And that's why in the private schools,
you see impact on English and Hindi,
and not on Telugu, the local language.
In [? Ghana-- ?] so it should be "ganna."
In [? Ghana, ?] we collected before a scholarship--
before giving scholarships to kids
to attend secondary school, we administered a baseline survey
where we asked kids and their parents
what they thought their returns to education were.
And parents had tremendous hope for secondary school education.
They thought that the income gain
would be of the order of 200%, 300%,
mainly because kids would be able to become
teachers and earn a lot of money once they do that.
In fact, very few kids became teachers,
so they increased their--
there was not such a large increase
in the income of the kids.
Many other good things happened, but this good things
doesn't seem to be particularly what the parents value.
So if what the parents value is mainly the legitimization
process that comes with the school,
then it seems really, really important to continue
working with the school, even though it's hard.
So we have to find a way to engage with the school system.

So if you have to engage with the school system,
then given that the problem is this curriculum is too hard,
you could say, well, it's very simple.
We just have to change the curriculum.
And that remains, I think, the Holy Grail.
For me, it's something that really one should work on.
Unfortunately, it's not going to be easy.
There is tremendous opposition from the education world.
In many settings, we go, in some sense, the other way,
where the curriculum is not simplify with one exception,
which is the government of Delhi, which decide to--
explicitly decide that they won't
finish the curriculum in Delhi.
They started to track kids to make sure
that they understood something.
And it led to large gains in test scores
before the pandemic.
In fact, so much so that the municipal schools in Delhi
outperformed for the first time ever the private school
at the school finishing exam.
So it seems to be that there they
had kind of the-- that's the one kind of political decision,
but it's a very special government, which
is sort of in term of its ideology, which
is both a sort of populist in a good sense in terms
of making sure that the services serve the people.
And that has remained a relatively isolated example.