PROFESSOR: The second example of the schools being
unable to leverage the math that exists in the world
is even more egregious because it should be more visible,
and kids should have been used to that
is, if you've ever been in a developing country in a city,
you'll see sometimes there are kids
who are selling in market--
not babies, like teenagers selling in markets.
Sometimes they go to school in the morning.
They sell in the afternoon.
Sometimes they've now stopped schools,
or they do that in the summer.
But you see a lot of kids selling on markets.
And if you have seen them, you would also
notice that they are very good at it.
They can compute very quickly and give you your change.
So I was always puzzled as to one,
do they really compute, or do they know things by heart?
And they just have a schedule in their mind
of how much 100 grams of tomato, 200 grams, 250, 300, 500,
the common quantity of tomatoes cost.
And they just pick in the menu and they don't really
calculate.
Or do they really calculate?
And my second question was, is it
the case that maybe the kids who end up working in markets
end up being the kids who are very, very good at math?
And so it's a selection.
So the first question is it real?
Do they really know how to count?
And second question is, is it just because it's
very selected subset?
So in order to answer this question,
we completed two studies--
one in Kolkata, one in Delhi--
where we went to market.
We is not me, but Indian people from our team.
They went and bought vegetables.
So they went three times.
Three pairs of shoppers went and bought each time two items--
so say, tomatoes and eggplant-- in funny quantities
so that it really requires a calculation.
So 300 gram of tomato, 450 gram of eggplant.
And then they gave the kid 500 rupees
and asked for the change.
OK, so this is not a usual--
you have to do your multiplication,
and then you have to add up, and then
you have to do the subtraction, you have to give the change.
You have to do that fast.
So we did that in Delhi, in Kolkata, three transaction
and in Delhi.
And after we had done that a little bit later on someone
came to the child and asked them if they were willing to do
little math games with us.
So that's the source of the data.
And then in Delhi we also went to schools
and did the opposite.
We played math games with them and then
we set up a fake market and asked them to sell
stuff, similar operation.
So what did we find?
The first one is that kids are, in fact, very good at math.
They get things right about 95% of the time.

The calculation is correct 95% of the time.
Sometimes there is a mistake, but you can tell them.
So with correction, 95%.
Without, 92%.
In Delhi, they are much less good.
The kids, the school kids, are much less good
than the market kids.
The school kids get it right about 50% of the time.
So the market children are, in fact, good at math,
and they are better than the school children.
The second thing is that it's not
just that they can do their own things, it's they can do other.
When we were playing the games, we
were giving them some other exercises.
Suppose that your tomatoes are not 25 rupees a KG,
but 28, then how much would it cost, and so on.
They make more mistakes than if it's their own thing.
And the further away it is-- for example,
if you go from tomato to carrots, it's a bit harder.
And from things sold in kilos to things sold by unit,
it's a bit harder.
So every time you go a bit further
from their sphere of expertise, they make more mistakes.
But by and large, they still get it right.
Even when it's far away, it's not their goods,
it's not their type of unit, and it's not the price,
they still get it right 60% of the time.
But now, if you ask them the other question, the thing
about division, the type of division I showed you before
or the type of subtraction I do, suddenly they're gone.
32% of the Calcutta kids can do a division.
50% of them can do a subtraction.
About half can-- I'm sorry, 15% of the Delhi kids
can do a subtraction.

15% of them can do a division.
And about half can do a subtraction,
which is crazy because 95% can do
two multiplication, an addition and subtraction correct.
But with the other test, only half can do a subtraction.
So what is going on here?
What's going on is they see the test.
They see that, you're asking me math question.
I'm not good at math.
That's why I'm not in school actually.
And in fact, they are good at math,
but they are not-- the moment you show them school math,
they're trying to bring up the algorithm.
They're trying to write things down.
They do the algorithm the wrong way.
They get the place value wrong.
Whereas in their own work, they actually
have developed methods that work well.
And they aren't mixed up by the half-baked
method they've learned from the schools
and not fully understood.
So that suggests that the school is
unable to take advantage of the flexibility of these children.
Note that when they can round, they are able to get problems.
They make less mistakes if things are say, 49% or 51%
because it can be rounded.
So that's the thing for the market kids.
For the school kids, not only they get it wrong half
the time, but they also get it-- even when they get it right,
this is how they arrive at the answer.
They do the algorithm extraordinarily inefficient.
They spend half an hour to answer the problem, which they
wouldn't have in the market.
So the conclusion is that the school
are unable to leverage or recognize existing knowledge,
either abstract or concrete.
So they are quite bad at selecting kids as well,
not just producing knowledge.
And in addition, what little they teach
is not useful for life.
Because even kids who are able to do
division and subtraction aren't able to put
it to use in everyday life.
So that is the problem we have with schools
in developing countries.

A lot of people are trying to figure out what this is about.
I want to tell you what it's not about.
It is not about the fact that children are unable to learn.
Why we know that?
Well, because they learn the market
the mathematical games just as well as the Cambridge kids.
It is not because teachers are underpaid because they
are, in fact, relative to other, overpaid.
And it is not either because they are lazy
or they don't understand their job.
The main problem that seems to be happening in developing
countries is what we've called the Tyranny of the Curriculum,
which is the way teachers understand
their job is to be teaching the curriculum, no matter what.
The curricula in a lot of developing countries
are coming straight from the colonial power that
have imposed very strict and demanding curricula
for a small elite of students who
were going to be their clerks in the future.
When education system were expanded,
the curricula haven't changed.
So you have situation like that, slip grade 4 curriculum
in Haryana in India, where I hope
you are good about your table up to 15
because that's the November program of grade 4 in Haryana.
So the level of what the kids are supposed to in grade 4--
and remember, these are kids who cannot add or subtract--
is completely crazy.
It corresponds to some dream of someone
that the education system should do
to an illusion of elite that, to some extent,
is emphasized as well by the parents.
Because the parents think of schools
as producing kids who might go to get a government job
and don't necessarily have in mind the benefits
that you get from just learning to read and write
in your everyday life, like we saw with the kids.
And that's the core of the problem
of the education quality in developing countries.
And hence, the solution has to be
about trying to break that in the everyday practice.
So what we'll do in the case on Monday
is to think about-- to start from this definition of what
the problem is or this statement of the problem,
and to think about what are possible solutions
to bring to improve the quality of education in this context.