PROFESSOR: The next question, once we agree that government
should pay for some or part of education, which
is, in fact, true in many countries of the world,
is should the government provide schooling?
So what's the difference between paying for education
and providing it?

Yes, [INAUDIBLE]?
STUDENT: I guess they incur a double cost
because it's like a non--
they create non-for-profit institutions, essentially,
because they're paying for people to go there
and they're also paying to sustain the school.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So the difference between paying for and providing--
so providing is the way that probably if you went to public
school, a good chance is you went to your local school,
which was free for you or your parents,
and was just run by the town or maybe by you're--
at the national level in some cases.
Depending on the country where you grew up.
But then there are other systems maybe that some of you
experienced where your education is still
partly or fully financed by the government,
but it's not provided by the government.

Did anybody, for example, went to a private school
with some extent of scholarship?

So that would be an example where
you get a scholarship, publicly-funded scholarship
to attend the private school that
can be at an individual level or there
can be voucher systems that tells their name,
that literally, people have a voucher that they can take
to the school of their choice.
Or in France, there is a whole network
of private school, parochial and non-parochial private schools
who are supported to a very, very large extent
by the government as long as they agree
to teach the curriculum that is being taught in public schools
as well.
So although that doesn't describe itself
as a voucher system, it is essentially
a voucher system where private schools
get paid to provide education.
And then you have charter schools,
which are common in the US, where someone--
a community or a company can decide to create a school,
commit to a particular curriculum that is approved,
and in exchange, get entirely funded by the city
on-- or by the local government on the education budget.
So there are all sorts of-- there is actually
a patchwork of systems.
And you find this patchwork of systems in all developing
countries.
And so in France, you have a public system,
but you have this parochial system
that's on a voucher system.
Chile relies almost essentially on private schools for which
students have a voucher.
Cote d'Ivoire very recently decided
that secondary education was going to be compulsory,
but then they discovered they didn't have
high schools to send the kids.
So instead, they gave every child a voucher
that they could take to any secondary school they wanted,
and secondary school emerged out of nowhere--
out of thin air, a whole market for secondary school emerged.
So there is a whole mix-up of--
and then there are private--
there are public schools that are financed largely by parents
in the form of school fees.
For example, secondary school in Ghana,
we are going to talk more about it today, are public,
but parents pay a lot.
So there is a whole mix-up.
So why should the--
so these are the alternative.
OK.
STUDENT: For your last point, was that through taxes?
Like areas where they pay for higher--
PROFESSOR: No, no, by fee.
They pay directly.
So someone always needs to pay.
So if it's not by--
if it's paid by the government at some place or the other,
it's taxes.
Could be local taxes or national taxes.
But in Ghana, parents pay fee, which are pretty large.
And they are not the whole cost, but they
are good part of the cost.
So they are public schools, but fee-paying public schools,
so the financing is mostly private.
So just to tell you that the model,
that if we have to have an education system,
it's a bunch of government schools.
In fact, in reality, there is a whole patchwork.
So why should the government--
we agree that-- or we-- that there
are good reasons why the government might
want to pay for a whole or part of the cost of schooling.
Why should they get in the business of running schools?
Seems like a bigger effort than actually providing it.
So paying for it, why should the government
possibly provide schools and not just pay for it?
Lucas?
STUDENT: They could teach the curriculum that they want,
and that, I guess, conforms to the society
that the leaders want.
PROFESSOR: So that's great.
So they could-- the government might
decide to provide schools because they
can be sure that the curriculum that is taught
is what they want.
Why couldn't they have a contract
with the private schools like we have
in France where the parochial school need
to teach the same curriculum?
STUDENT: I mean, I guess they could, but it's
a little bit less stable or--
I guess if they operate their own schools,
they have very clear--
they can make very clear goals, expectations,
and they have a lot more control than if they like hand it over
to a private school.
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So this is the key control, it's the key term here.
You can try and write a contract to have a curriculum,
but it is hard to write a complete contract
with all of the contingencies.

There is, in today's-- or yesterday's New York Times,
a very interesting article about--
Op-Docs about inpatient facilities for troubled teens.
Which explores exactly that, which
is partly privately, mostly publicly-funded
private facilities to take care of troubled teens and the very
bad treatment that kids receive there.
And that illustrates exactly this example,
which is it is pretty hard to write
a complete contract about what you need
to achieve in these schools.
So in this case of the facilities for troubled kids,
the facility's main objective is to not lose the kids in nature
or let them harm themselves or others.
So everything is geared to that, which leads to abuse
in the form of bad treatment and putting the kids in isolation
and so on, and at least they don't--
kids don't escape.
What's not written in the contract
is that what constitutes treatment for these children.
So that's an extreme situation, in which
you'll find in prisons as well.
There are some privately-operated prisons.
And it's pretty difficult to write a complete contract.
So you might insist that the prisons don't escape,
but then there are periodically stories of abuse,
et cetera in those prisons because when there is a one
dimension, which is incentivizing
the contract and not the rest, you might become--
neglect the rest.
So this is a type of work that Bengt Holmstrom, who
won the Nobel Prize a few years ago,
has developed theoretically here in the department.
So the same thing might happen with school,
that it's pretty hard to write a complete contract.
Even school for regular kids, you just--
you might be able to be clear on what you want for math,
but if you go back to [INAUDIBLE] point
about a common culture, it's harder
to enforce what constitutes a common culture.
And so you might decide that you want to provide the schools
and not just run them.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess I have a quick question about the control
aspect.
Like, how can we say that it's better
getting more control over the government
[INAUDIBLE] versus just [INAUDIBLE] spending
[INAUDIBLE] less [INAUDIBLE] the incentives between the teachers
and the government?
PROFESSOR: That's a great, great question, which is my next one,
which is, why you might want to avoid--
why government might possibly want to not get
into the business of providing schools.
And it relates on how difficult it
would be to control the private agents
and to write the contract fully and monitor
that the contract is enforced.
Rather than the control, you can have on your own employees
and the fact that governments are not necessarily
very good at running anything.
And it's hard to give incentives in the public sectors
and the public sectors become large and hard to manage and so
on.
So of course, economists love to say bad things
about the government, so I'm not going
to insist too much on that, but that's basically the trade-off,
is that a privately-provided operator is going
to have very clear idea of what their incentives are and are
going to try and do the best within their budget
to get there.
Whereas the incentive in the public sector
are a little bit more mixed up, and it
might be difficult to give teachers,
for example, the right level of incentive to work hard
and you may have to pay them much more and so on.
It might become much more expensive to provide
public education than to provide comparable private education.
Angela and then Julie.
STUDENT: The advantage when the government
provides public schooling is that there's
a baseline that the government not only pays for, but provides
for as well, and doesn't leave much leverage
for different private agents to intervene.
Having a market for schools is troubling simply
because if everyone pays for it and decides to,
for example, use a voucher, there
might be different interventions or some parents who are richer
and decide to fund that school more.
So in the end, I think in the long-run, the services
that different schools offer might differ simply
because it's not the government providing for them,
so ensuring that there's a baseline that everyone has.
And also, in terms of locally, like residential places,
if all of the people living in that same community
go to that same school, like--
whatever, it's-- if the--
The advantage of government providing schooling
is that there's a baseline that everyone has access
to regardless of the school, regardless of what everyone.
PROFESSOR: Great.
This would imply, though, that if that was the desire,
to create a uniformity in what it's being delivered,
this would imply that people do not have the right
to opt out of the system.
And there are very few examples of where that's the case.
So in Soviet Union, you were not allowed
to go to private school, there was
only public school and everybody did go to the public school.
But in many settings, private schools are an option,
so that problem never really goes away.
But for example, in health care, in Canada,
in many of the provinces in Canada,
because the same can apply-- the same debate
you can have about health care.
You can have a publicly-funded privately provided health care.
In Canada, you don't-- in many provinces,
you don't have the right to get supplemental health insurance.
It is what it is.
You have to get your health care from the public service.
So it's not-- and Canada is not the Soviet Union.
So that's a more extreme position
to say the government should provide all of education.
And then you have the trade-offs of how well you
can do it versus how to ensure uniformity versus people
can choose their education, but it's within a timeline,
so people have to at least learn a few things.
Again, quoting from The New York Times,
there was an article a few weeks ago about yeshivas.
Some yeshivas in New York actually
are not teaching English or math beyond a very basic level
and are publicly funded.
Illustrating either the fact that the American culture is
very permissive or the fact that it's
hard to enforce a contract.
In such a world where it's hard to enforce a contract,
then you might like to have more public schools.
And in a world where it's hard to get your teachers to do
anything, then you might want to have more private school.
So my objective is certainly not to tell you
this is how it should be because it really depends on all
of these things, but what we have to think about,
what a policymaker has to think about when they think
about designing their system.
Yeah, Julie?
STUDENT: It seems like if you centralize the schooling,
the schools could get really, really good.
I guess there's like--
it goes both ways, though, because sometimes competition
is good.
So I could see a situation where if it's all
run by the government or like a good percentage
is run by the government, then you
can put a lot of funding into making the best curriculum
and using it everywhere and just getting
really good at making schools.
But on the other hand, maybe having
competing schools where there's demand and different schools
get the vouchers and stuff, the competition
could like promote growth or something.
So I think you just have to test it and see
which is better, but like--
PROFESSOR: Great.
So that's another very interesting trade-off.
The other very interesting trade-off
is the benefits of scale, that if a government system runs
all of the schools, they can invest
into having not just excellent curriculum,
but excellent teacher training and excellent supervision
and excellent way of organizing the system and so on.
Versus competition, might align each schools better
to each community's desire, might provide--
might give the right incentive to the agents
and so on, and then these two might potentially be--
this is a trade-off.
So we'll have to see again empirically how it looks like.
So I'm not even going to give you
much food for thought for how to think about this--
each of these questions because they are very
context-dependent, but just to put it in your radar screen,
that the answer to this question of how
much the government should pay for education and at what level
and whether the government should provide education
are not obvious.