PROFESSOR: That means that the poor have profitable investment
opportunity.
So they should be willing to borrow,
even if the interest rates are very high.
And therefore, we should not see that they are super
sensitive to the interest rate.
So to answer this question directly,
Dean Karlan and John Zinman worked with a credit firm
in South Africa.
So it's a consumer credit firm.
So it's a bit different from this business lending.
It's kind of halfway between a moneylender
and a micro-credit enterprise.
They are lending at a pretty high interest
rate between about 8% and 12% per month,
depending on your risk class.
And this is the type of company that sends you this direct mail
marketing.
So the bank sent off a letter to offer credit
at a specific rate, which was randomly varied by people,
to about 55,000 former clients.
So this type of direct mail marketing
is something they used to do.
But one thing that was new is that they were
randomizing the offer rate.
96% of people got an interest rate
that was below what they were used to.
And 4% were above.
So the bank was a bit reluctant to offer higher interest rate
than what people were used to.
So they couldn't convince them to give too many.
They also varied the suggested loan maturity,
which is over how long you want to reimburse.
Although that's something that they could choose.
And so this is the take-up, which is
the number of people who apply.
So first thing I want you to note is that very few people--

so this is the--
sorry, forget it.
This is normalized at 0.
So this is whether the interest rate is lower or higher
to what they're used to.
And you can see that there is a small impact of the interest
rate, but not really very high.
You start getting-- so most of the people
are here in this range because if you remember, 96% of people
were offered interest rates lower
than what they were used to.
And 0 is normalized to what is their usual interest rate.
So most people are below their usual interest rate.
And that doesn't seem to convince them very much,
between 5% below what you're used to per month,
which is a large difference.
It only increased the take-up by about one percentage point.
So people are not very sensitive to the interest rate.
Over a range, even when there is an increase,
they are not very sensitive to the interest rate,
either when it becomes higher, except when
it's really much higher.
So when the interest rate is 5% higher to what they're used to
is where it really starts to go down.
So over a range, over the rate that people are used to,
people are not super sensitive to the interest rate.
So that suggests that people are willing to-- the poor have
opportunities.
We saw that in the [INAUDIBLE] and McKenzie work.
They are borrowing at very high rate.
They don't particularly care about what
the interest rate is.
So there is scope for increasing the interest rate even higher
than what they are today.

So the clients seem to be more sensitive to interest rate
increase.
So the institution probably prices above the optimal
level in terms of getting maximum results.

The sensitivity to the repayment duration is much larger.
So if you increase the suggested duration of repayment,
people are very sensitive to that.
So people don't seem to be very sensitive to interest rate,
not very elastic.
But there is one caveat to that, which
is it's possible that they don't really understand what
the interest rates are and that people are not
sensitive to interest rate over this range
not because they don't mind, because in any case,
they are above whatever their project is worth,
at least that much.
And so they are willing to take a loan at these prices.
It could also be that they just don't see it
and that the organization, such as some
of for-profit microfinance organizations,
like Compartamos, which charge 100% a year,
is actually taking advantage of people not understanding what
prices are and obfuscation.
So this is something that Muhammad Yunus is very upset
about, saying that basically, they
are no better than the moneylender we
tried to displace.
They are taking advantage to people
because the reason why people are not
very sensitive to interest rate is not because everyone
has a good product.
It's because they are not really understanding
what the rates are.
So most people say, well, if people
are willing to borrow at this rate,
why wouldn't I lend them at this rate?
Again, in the traditional economics language,
it's, why would you buy something you don't want?
So if you're willing to borrow at this rate
and you do reimburse, then it must
be that you have a use of money that is worth it for you.
Either it's consumption that you really want now
or it's a great business opportunity.
So why wouldn't I be lending them at this rate,
if this is what it costs me?
But what this implies, that people fully
understand the interest rate.
And it's not really obvious, first of all
because they're not always very clearly presented.
For example, in India, the microfinance organization
presents the interest rate as flat.
So basically, you borrow at the beginning of the year.
And then you repay always the same thing.
And this is what is presented to you as an interest rate.
So you're saying, you borrow 100.
And then you owe me 120, which you're
going to repay every week in installments, 50 installments.
So the interest rates are presented
as to what you have to repay every week.
But, of course, the capital goes down.
So the interest rate, the flat interest rate is about half
of the actual interest rate that people
are paying because over the course of a year,
their capital goes down.
So the flat interest rate looks lower
than what the real interest is.
If I present you a flat interest rate of 24%, which is often
what's given in a microfinanced MFI, that actually
is, real interest rate, that is about double of that.

So it's not clear that people understand the difference
between, say, the flat interest rate and the actual interest
rate.
It's a little subtle.
And it's not clear that they're paying
a huge amount of attention to how much,
what the interest rate really is.
So to find it out and to find out
how sensitive people are to marketing manipulation,
in the [INAUDIBLE] experiment, they varied, at the same time,
the price of the offer, which would be what people really
care about, and other aspects of the offer
letter with randomization that are very common in the mail
marketing that you're getting or that have become also
very common with A/B testing, variation
in presentation that should not make
a difference to your decision, but in fact turned out to be.
So here is a letter, an example of the letter where
they had the interest rate.
So you had the suggested maturity, the loan amount,
how much they would have to repay every month.
So that's the actual interest rate.
And then they had things like that,
like a special rate for you.
They had a photo, a photo of male, photo of female.
So they're varied.
No photo of men and women, language
affinity, we speak your language, special rate for you,
low rate, versus no blurb, suggested use,
you can use it to do something special,
whether they had various options or just one,
whether the interest rate was explicitly disclosed.
Or the client, like in the example I gave you,
the interest rate was not really disclosed.
You had to figure it out from your monthly repayment
over this suggested duration.
So whether there is obfuscation or not,
comparison with competition in the last frame [INAUDIBLE]
and whether there was cell phone raffles--
so all type of things that are frequent
manipulation that moneylender, payday lenders
in the US, et cetera, will typically add to their offers.
And they wanted to know if people
fall for these kind of things.
And the answer is that they do.
Taken jointly, all of this manipulation affects the men,
and in particular, putting a female photo as opposed
to a male photo or no photo increased the loan ticket
by 0.4 percentage point, which is more than
the effect of one percentage point decrease in the interest
rate, more than the effect of going from 8% to 7%.
So that seems like little, 0.4%.
But it's actually, compared to the elasticity,
it's very large.
Not giving a huge increase, the take-up by 0.6%.
Maybe people feel constricted by a [INAUDIBLE]..
Proposing only one example of loan
increased the take-up by 0.7%.
If you put two examples, people find it complex.
They don't want to have to deal with it.
The cell phone raffles, interestingly,
decreases take-up.
Maybe people think, do I really need a cell phone
at this moment, or no?
And then they don't take it if they don't want the cell phone.
So although it's difficult to predict exactly what would
matter, the point is that irrelevant manipulation
seems to matter as much as the interest rate.
And that suggests that the client awareness
may be limited.
And we cannot really fully understand why people take
loans.
And they might not take loans in their best interest
because the loan is such a complicated product that
is very hard for people to evaluate.