PROFESSOR: So the great innervation of microfinance
was to provide a market solution to increase and find basically,
the innovation to increase capital among the poor.
And they did that.
So there are innovations that are new cell phones, software,
and so on.
Microfinance, if you want, was a process innovation,
was inspired by what people were doing in the field,
but was putting it together in like one package.
The organizational innovations were group lending.
Although at the beginning, was very central in the Grameen
basic product.
And it's sort of mostly gone away,
with most organizations don't use group lending anymore.
Dynamic incentives-- so similar to what
we found in South Africa, where people are given a loan
and then they get the next loan if they
reimburse the first one.
And they can progress and get larger and larger loans.
The only lending to women is the idea
that women need the money more because they have less access
to other sources of credit.
And they're also more reliable.
They offer very simple products.
So typically, it's one loan that's a bunch of money
that you reimburse with interest in 50 equal installments
from the first week.
So I give you 100 plus an interest rate of 20.
And you separate the 120 into 50 installments.
And you reimburse that every week.
The admin cost is much lower, by the fact that people are coming
together in one place every week to reimburse,
that the project is simple.
They don't do any screening of the project or anything.
They rely, to some extent, on social monitoring,
and to some extent on this very regular coming.
They provide very strong incentives
to the loan officers, both for sourcing clients
and for actually getting good reimbursement from them.
They don't pay them very much.
And there is a huge focus on zero defaults.
So they don't tolerate defaults.
The moment they see a risk of a default,
they will wait and go back to the person, et cetera,
because they think that there is the possibility that default
will start snowballing into everyone defaulting
at the same time.

So the history is that in 1976, Muhammad Yunus
created the bank.
He was a Professor of Economics at the University
of Dhaka in Bangladesh.
And he started taking field trips with his students
and saw this woman, and saw that there was a lot of potential.
And he could lend to them, but then
kind of over the years, refined this particular product.
And it's expanded into a worldwide phenomenon.
In 2016, they had 132 million clients,
mostly women with very high repayment rate.
He won the Nobel Peace Prize in the early 2000.
And now, microfinance Institution
tried to go further than just credit
by providing other things, larger individual loans, saving
products, insurance products, et cetera.
But there has also been, after this peak of popularity
in the 2000s, there has been a backlash against microfinance,
with a documentaries talking about microfinance
pushing people to suicide, a very negative press
article appearing, in particular in the early 2010s.
So you went from complete exaltation of microfinance
to complete hatred of microfinance.
And maybe we are somewhere in a much more moderate position
now, where people don't think it's
a solution to all the problems in the world,
but it's also not the worst thing that
has ever happened to the poor.
And I think to some extent, the evidence that I'm
going to discuss now that has mounted over the years,
has made a difference in helping the world go back
to this relatively middle of the road position of microfinance.
So let's start with discussing the question of impact.

Is it a good thing, or is it a bad thing?
And it's interesting because in microfinance for a long time,
microcredit organization had no interest in discussing
the question of impact.
So why is it-- what was the--
Julie looked surprised.
So can someone come up with a reason
for why if you're a microcredit organization, what
would be your reasoning to say, I
don't need to worry about this particular question?

Lucas?
STUDENT: If there's demand for the product,
and you can say that it doesn't matter
because people could rationally make decisions that better
them.
So if they want microfinance, then they're
getting microfinance.
And microfinance would be helping them.
PROFESSOR: That is true.
But for example, if you're giving away textbooks,
and people say I want--
and you say, well people seem to want my textbook,
so what's your problem?
So there is one more piece of argument you need to make,
which is different from say, an NGO gives away textbook.
And they say, well, people are coming and taking my textbook,
so that must be fine.
So there is one little difference
with microfinance to the example of giving away textbooks.

Yeah, Liam?
STUDENT: They have to repay them.
PROFESSOR: They have to repay the loans.
So it's a textbook argument.
Someone could make an argument if they sold them at a price
where they are making money or at least breaking even.
So the argument was microfinance is like look,
we are just a product.
We are a product that people buy,
and that they buy at the price that it costs us to deliver it.
Because we are making money.
So Mohammad Yunus has always been very, very, very keen
to show that Grameen was financially sustainable.
And at this point, then you're like, just another fact.
Nobody is claiming that a car manufacturer needs
to evaluate the causal impact of making cars,
because people are buying it at the price they cost.
It's only if you want the government to subsidize
your car, say, because there are electric cars
or something like, that you want to show
the impact on the environment.
And here, it was the same with microcredit.
So since we are profitable, we are just
like any other business.
As long as we have clients, they must have some value out of it
sufficient.
And since we don't require funding,
we don't need to be accountable to anyone but the clients.
So that's why for many years, it was impossible,
as we were growing and trying to evaluate things,
it was really on the top of my list
to find a partner to do a microcredit evaluation.
And I couldn't.
So what is wrong with that reasoning, if anything?
Or is that reasoning convincing?

STUDENT: I mean, I think it's like sound to some degree.
But you could also say people go to loan sharks for money.
That doesn't mean that loan sharks are good.
I think there's less--
like, this is not good.
But also they maybe have no alternative,
and that's why there's demand.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So one question is whether it is in fact good for them.
So there could be a question of, there is an impact,
but it's negative.
And this is what was argued by this documentary that
came in the 2010s, showing that it pushed people to suicide.
And so on people are making mistakes
when they're borrowing from microfinance.
They're not paying attention to the interest rate,
borrowing at higher rates than they expect.
The microfinance are just like the loan shark,
selling them product with photos that they don't need.
And the impact is actually negative.
So people would be better off not having this product,
to the extent that we should regulate it away out
of existence.
So in other words, crack cocaine,
people also make money in their business,
and we still think we don't want to have crack cocaine around.
I'm not saying that microcredit is like crack cocaine.
But that's the argument that's being made is some--
we have to look at the whole range of impact.
If it turns out to be negative, that's a problem.
And it could be the case, simply because the industry is
a bit obscuring, obfuscating what they're actually
interested in, maybe pushing people into getting loans
they don't need, and so on.
That's the first argument.
What would be a second reason that people might still
want to know the impact of microfinance?

That is something you may or may not know for a fact.
So if nobody has a second reason, I'll give it to you,
but maybe you have an idea.

Yeah?
STUDENT: I think it's just that because there weren't research
done when random other news that came in that wasn't actually
back, there wasn't as much real backing
for the benefits of these.
So people just started defaulting on their loans.
So it's not in the interest of the microfinance.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so it could be that it's actually,
so that was more on the strategic point, which
is strategically, the microfinance
thought that impact evolution could only
be bad news for them.
Because everybody saw that microfinance was great.
So they didn't want to wipe up the boat.
And the fact is that, when people think that something
is great without any empirical backing,
they can change their opinion quickly.
And having some empirical backing
would have helped them, that's true.
So that's from the strategic point of view,
of why they should have agreed to have.
But there is another substantive argument that
is also being made in the book.

That substantive argument is that
the microfinance organizations are
profitable because they operate in an environment that heavily
subsidizes them.
And in particular, in India, for example, there
is something called the priority sector, which forces the bank
to lend a good fraction of their portfolio,
40% of their portfolio, to the priority sector.
And microfinance is part of the priority sector.
If they don't lend to either small businesses or agriculture
or microfinance organization, they
have to lend to the government at very, very low interest
rate.
And the bank know that they are pretty
bad at lending to small firms.
So they do it, but they lose money on it.
And they prefer to lend to the microfinance organization
at 8%, than to the government at 0,
or to try themselves, to operate a small business lending
operation that they lose money on
because there is so much default and non-performing assets
in the small business sector.
So the microcredit organization, because of that priority sector
regulation, have access to very, very, very low interest rate
themselves.
They can borrow at very low rate.
And these rates are de facto subsidized.
So in fact, the entire society is paying for microfinance
to make money.
So they can't say that--
which may be fine.
Someone took the decision to put the microfinance
inside the priority sector, because they
thought that there was a good reason,
to think that it was a good thing to do for the poor.
But the point is the moment you are subsidized,
then it's like anything else.
It's like school or immunization or textbooks or so on.
We need to know what the impact is.
It's just the subsidy is a bit hidden.
And then, there is the last point in this slide,
is the strategic point, which is many realize
that the impact might be negative.