
PROFESSOR: Rachel Meager looked at this question
of heterogeneity a bit more across studies,
because every study individually can look at, oh,
are there people who benefit?
So what she did is to propose new methods
to allow her to look not just at the effect on average,
but the effect of various quantiles of the distribution.
So what's the people who benefit the most,
do they actually benefit?
And what she finds is that for most people, up till 95%,
you can really say that nobody benefits.
The 95% is like nobody.
Then, from the 95% who have the least effect,
they have no effect.
And for the top 5%, it's very noisy.
It's more noisy than-- you don't know, it could be big.
Something for profit, you can see 0,0,0,0.
For the people at the low 5%, it could have hurt them.
Who knows?
For the people at the high 5%, it might have helped them.
You don't know, but there is too much noise to say.
So until 75th percentile, there is clearly no effect.
After that, no generalizable evidence.
The data is too noisy to tell.
But however, there is strong and generalizable evidence
there again that a household with prior business do better.
And then, what we did in Hyderabad, one of the studies
in India, is we continued to follow
the household for a while, and after six years,
for the people who had a prior business,
we're seeing a pretty large impact on assets--
pretty large impact on assets and revenues
that are doubled for people who had
a prior business in villages where microfinance was offered
versus not.
So that is not something that's very
helpful for the microfinance organizations
because, once they are in place, they don't know that someone
has a prior business.
But it is something that is interesting for us,
the researchers, because it tells us there
are people who are entrepreneurs,
who are gung-ho entrepreneurs, who would benefit
from microfinance.
And if we found a way for microfinance organizations
to find them, they would, in fact, potentially
have a large effect.
So the question is, how do we find them?

The problem with microfinance is that microfinance
is too plain vanilla.
It's too one-size-fits-all.
It's hard for microfinance organization
to identify the true entrepreneurs.
We know they exist because we can find them in the data,
but they don't know because they don't know how to find them.
Microcredit is very bad at identifying
the good entrepreneurs because they perform
very little screening, they discourage risk
because you're borrowing, in any case, every week
the same amount of money.
The loans do not grow, so there is no advantage for you
in succeeding more.
And since there is this very, very strong focus
on zero default, the loan officers
would tend to discourage people from taking risky propositions.
I've heard loan officers saying that their favored microcredit
client is someone who takes a loan to say buy a TV
or have a wedding and then will repay based off of a wage
employment that they have.
So this is like the opposite of taking risks for your business.
So the question is, is it possible
for a microfinance organization to identify
better people who would benefit from money to grow
their business?
And here, there is a very interesting study
by Natalia Rigol [INAUDIBLE] and Ben Roth
where they're using the community information to target
the high-ability entrepreneur.
So what they did is they worked in Maharashtra,
and they formed a group of entrepreneurs in periurban
Maharashtra to rank their peers, in a group [INAUDIBLE]
of six people they knew, on the metrics of profitability
and growth potential.
So basically, they asked, who is the best businessman
in your group?
Rank them.
And then, they randomly distributed cash grants of $100
to 1/3 of these entrepreneurs-- not just the most productive,
just randomly across groups--
to measure their actual productivities.
And what they find is that people
are quite good at finding out who
is telling who is the most productive
when the average return to $100 is 8% per month, which
is very similar to the average return
that we found for Sri Lanka.
But in the group that is in the third, that
is ranked in the top third by peer ranking,
it's actually 17% to 27%--
so much higher.
So people are able to tell you if they want to.
They are able to tell you who is productive.
In fact, they are better than machine learning at doing that.
So what they try is to say, well, we
have a lot of information on these people.
Let's try and predict the profitability based on machine
learning.
And then, this machine learning prediction
is less good than just one person from the village
telling you.
The problem is that if they know that there is
something at stake, they lie.
So instead of telling you, reporting the most productive
people, they tell you themselves,
or they tell you their nephew, or their niece, or something
like that.
So what you need to do is to give them
incentive to say what they really believe.
So they implement something called the Bayesian Truth
Theorem-- which is very complicated--
which compares your report to second-order belief of report.
But it doesn't matter.
You just tell people, hey, give me the truth.
I'll pay you as a function of how accurate you are.
And I have a way to know that you didn't lie, so just tell me
the truth.
And people believe that.
And in fact, you have a mechanism
that's a very subtle mechanism.
So they just say, you will be rewarded for truthfulness,
and they do it.
So that's the design the entrepreneurs either
get a grant or not a grant.
They form a group, either with high stakes or low stakes,
to see whether people misreport when
they know their report will be allocated to grant.
And then, they have the mechanism
for the Bayesian Truth Theorem mechanism
to see whether they can incentivize truthfulness,
boosting the no-stakes report and the high-stakes report.
And the finding is that, in the absence of this mechanism,
people lie in high-stakes, but with the mechanism,
they don't lie in high-stakes.
So it is possible to use the information that
exists in the community to encourage people to, reveal
what they know about how productive people are,
people that have this information and are willing--
it's possible for people to share it.