PROFESSOR: The next thing that was also
done in the context of this South African experiment
is to try looking at effect of adverse selection moral hazard.
So the adverse selection question
is whether high interest rate attracts unreliable borrowers.
The moral question or hidden action
is whether interest rate induced unreliable behavior
once you have the loan and whether it
leads to exposed default because you're not able to pay.
So how can we identify them?
By definition, they are hidden.
So it's not something we can easily find out.
So what I did in this paper, still
with our same African bank, is something super creative design
to make progress on this question.
So what they did is building on this idea of sending a letter,
so everyone gets their letters with a different rate.
We already know that the people who get a higher offer
are somewhat less likely to repay
and less likely to borrow.
And they do repay less.
So the proportion of loan past due
goes down for people who get a low rate.
So it's 10.5% of people are delayed
repaying if they have a high offer
and borrow at a high rate.
And 8.2% of people who received the low offer
and borrow at a low rate to repay.
So is this moral hazard or adverse selection
or we don't know?

The fact that, so higher interest rates
more default. Is that moral hazard, adverse selection,
or simply liquidity constraint you can't pay? [? Evan? ?]
STUDENT: [? I'm sorry. ?]
PROFESSOR: You look like [? engaged. ?]
So we see that it makes sense.
People who have a higher interest rate
repay less often than people who have the low interest rate.
But I want to know whether it's moral hazard, so something that
happens after the loan, or it's adverse selection, so
something that reflects the selection of the [? client, ?]
or we can't know.

Yep.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] .
PROFESSOR: OK, I'll take another vote.

No, [? Robert, ?] so you have the-- so why is it
adverse selection?

Go ahead, go ahead, yeah, yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] well, you said so [INAUDIBLE]..
The group of people accepting is [? random ?] here.
So this would probably be [INAUDIBLE] particular one.
PROFESSOR: So that would be a moral hazard if it's after.
Well, yes, it's true that the [? troupe ?]
of people who offered a particular rate
are randomly chosen.
But not everybody accepts.
In fact, a lot of people don't accept.
So accepting to take the loan is very selected.
And we have already seen that you
are less likely to accept if the interest rate is higher.
So in fact, the people who accept to take the loan
are not randomly selected.
And we can expect the people who accept
to take the loan with a higher rate
to be different than the people who accept to take
the loan with a lower rate.
And that may reflect adverse selection.
That may or may not.
So it could be adverse selection.
On the other hand, once they take the loan,
they have a higher rate to reimburse
if they accept the loan.
So that could have a causal effect
on their choice of project.
That could have an effect on their just liquidity
availability.
They need more liquidity to repay.
So there could be moral hazard or exposed repayment burden
effect.
So we don't know because they [INAUDIBLE]---- yep.
STUDENT: Can you separate them by saying
you're going to offer everyone a high rate loan and then,
of the people who accept that, randomly choose people
to actually have a lower rate?
PROFESSOR: Wonderful, exactly.
So it's exactly what they did.
And for doing that, they were really
celebrated for a super creative design.
So you reproduced it in five minutes
of thinking about it in a class.
So that's really excellent.
So what they did is that they had a high offer, low offer.
So you randomized into getting a high offer or low offer.
And once people actually show up with their letter
in the office, some of the high offer people
are told, hey, good news.
Today only, special offer, you can have the low offer.
So they've already agreed to come for the high offer.
So presumably, they'll take the low offer.
They're even happier.
And now we have all the good comparison.
So people show up with different offer rate.
And they end up with the same actual rate.
So if I compare, say, [? Florida ?] and Lucas,
[? Florida ?] coming with a higher rate than Lucas
with a lower rate.
But then [? Florida ?] gets the lower rate.
They are selected differently because she agreed
to come on this higher rate.
So she is maybe from a slightly different pool.
But then their condition expressed are the same.
So they should neutralize moral hazard
and give me adverse selection.
Conversely, if I compare [? Florida-- ?] so suppose
[? Florida ?] and Javier both came with a high letter.
Javier comes into the office, and I give him
the high interest rate.
But when [? Florida ?] comes I've
already offered her the lower.
They are selected similarly because they both agreed
to come at a higher rate.
But she ends up with a lower rate,
so the adverse selection is neutralized.
And all I have is a moral hazard.
So by comparing [? Florida's ?] to Lucas,
I had adverse selection.
By comparing [? Florida ?] to Javier,
I have the moral hazard.
So that is that's exactly what they did, and this
was really, really a excellent idea
that people have now used in various settings
of surprising people with prices.
So this is summarizing here comparing
people who came with high offer rate, low offer rate.
Nobody is offered a low offer rate initially
and ends up with a high contract rate
because those people would be upset.
So that is [? empty. ?]
Comparing the high contract rate to the low contract rate among
people who initially got a high offer,
I get the [? ex-post ?] effect.
I'll explain to you what's in diagonal here.
And comparing [? colon, ?] I get the adverse selection.
So they add one more layer of things
to separate moral hazard from just the fact that mechanically
if you have to repay more it's harder, which is they offer
dynamic incentive, which is to say, if you reimburse nicely,
you will have access to this lower rate again in the future.
So that's on top of that.
Among people who are given a low rate, some of them
are given dynamic incentives.
Some of them are encouraged to continue to behave well
to keep these offers.
So they have the similar offer burden,
but they get, in addition, an extra incentive
to behave and to reimburse.
So what do they find?
We have half of the slides in this table
and the other half in the next one.
The selection effect, comparing the high offer low contract
to lower offer low contract, they find some selection effect
with more repayment difficulty in the high offer group,
even though they end up with a low contract.
Co-payment burden effect, they're
finding a pretty large effect with the low contract
people repaying more than the high contract people.
And that seems to be due largely to this dynamic incentives
where people who are given an incentive to behave well,
this is where we find a larger effect.
People who are given incentive to repay in order
to continue this better terms in the future
reimburse a bit more.
So all that suggests that there is
some amount of adverse selection and some amount of moral hazard
coming, which is where we have the clearest evidence
from the dynamic incentive offering the--
increasing the repayment rates.
So in summary so far, we found evidence from the Sri Lanka
paper that the return to capital seems very high among the poor,
that there is a [INAUDIBLE],, but almost everyone
seems to benefit from a cash infusion in their business.
They are very durable and growing effect of these loans.
Nevertheless, people seem to need some encouragement
to the project of growing the business.
It's not always sufficient to give them just cash.
It's not sufficient to reimburse directly.
And if you remember early in the semester
we looked at GiveDirectly experiment
where people were just given cash.
And for the most part, they don't
choose to invest the money into a business.
They choose to invest the money in their house
or in consumption or things like that.
So it seems that not everybody has an immediate business
opportunity that they want to get into.