PROFESSOR: Here is another example
that I wanted to give you, for how sometimes crazy
the credit market can be.
This is the credit to food vendors
in India and the Philippines.
So in both countries, this is a study
that was done with people who are selling vegetables
on market.
For many people, the way it works is that in the morning,
they go to the sellers, to the wholesalers of fruits.
They take the older fruits on credit.
And then they sell them during the day.
And at the end of the day, they reimburse them
with a 5% interest rate per day.
You realize what 5%, like 5% interest rate per day,
how much would it be in a month?

Would it be-- sorry?
STUDENT: From the chapter?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's a lot.
It's not 150% is the key answer.
It's not multiplied because it's compounding.
It compounds really, really, really, really, really fast.
So the interest rate becomes enormous.
So that's 5% a day.
So what is in the book is this fact.
What is not in the book is what they did, which is to try--
and what they did and what happened.
It's not that the book because it had not been done yet.
What they did is that they provide
a debt payoff to a group, debt payoff with financial education
to a group and just financial education to a third group.
And then they have a control group.
And then they follow them four to six weeks after payoff
and then a few months later and then a few months later, and up
to two years later.
And what they want to know is whether these people
are in a debt trap, the people who are borrowing at 5% a day.
Are they in a debt trap, which is there is nothing
they can do.
Once you start borrowing, there is
nothing they manage to do to get out of it.
And therefore, if that were the case, if I repay the debt,
they would be very careful not to fall back into debt.
And they would stay debt free.
So they do that.
They visit them again after four to five weeks.
Many of them are still dead free.
At four months, it's mostly gone.
They're all back into debt.
And at two years, there is zero difference
between the treatment and the control.
So what they found is that, first of all,
the interest rates are huge.
And people can live like that.
So that means their activity has that level of suitability.
It would take, it would seem very
little we calculate that in the book, how much tea you
would need to drink less in order to get out of the debt.
And that doesn't happen.
But more surprisingly, even if I get you out of your debt,
people go back relatively rapidly.
So in the article, they discuss many possible reasons
why they fall back into debt.
So what's your idea of what could be reasons why
they would fall back into debt?

Evan?
STUDENT: You can think of a debt payoff as like a cash infusion.
So they then, spend the money they
have that normally go towards repaying their debt
on something else that they might need because they
are extremely poor.
And then after that cycle, they're
right back where they were, where the amount of money
they have requires them to go back into debt.
PROFESSOR: So that's right.
So it doesn't happen exactly like that, because basically,
our debt is repaid once.
And it's repaid to the fruit seller.
So for a while, they don't have a debt.
But then you're exactly right with the idea
with something else happens.
So for example, there is a shock when someone gets sick.
And then they don't have the money,
that they have spent the money of yesterday
buying the medicine.
They don't have the money one particular morning.
So they instead, borrow the vegetable
that particular morning.
And then they are back into debt.
So shock happens.
Shocks happen.
Consumption needs arise.
And then, people get back to where they were.
STUDENT: If the shocks are generally
the same across the population, why
isn't the people who didn't have the debt end up more in debt?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so that's a great question,
which is you would think then, OK, they have some debt.
But they should still have less.
Because at the end of the day, I still
have given them that heads up, corresponding to one
day worth of the food supply.

And the shocks are the same.
So it can't be just the shock.
The mechanics is the shocks.
But it has to be that they made a choice that
is different as a function of the debt they had.
So what the difference could be that there
are credit constraints.
So there is only so much the lender will give them.
The vegetable wholesaler will only
give them like a day supply, and that's it in the debt.
So then they get that, so then they have to make due somehow.
That's not a choice.
So maybe the natural thing to do is
to start borrowing again from them
up to a point, where it doesn't become an option anymore.
Then they do something more costly, for example,
buying fewer of the medicine or not
buying your kid the toy they wanted or something like that.
So in that sense, it might be that people don't fully
understand what is going on.
They don't fully understand how much money
they could make over time by avoiding this high cost
borrowing.
But they had a financial education,
and it didn't seem to help.
So maybe their financial education was bad.
Or it could be that people are extraordinarily
time-inconsistent.
So in the present, the temptations are so high that
you cannot not succumb unless it's not possible,
because you are within your credit limit,
or maybe a combination of all these things.
And the study isn't really able to separate
these various things.
But what it does suggest is people
are not into a debt trap.
They chose to borrow at these rates.