PROFESSOR: So what are the potential barrier
to credit for the poor?
The first one is informational asymmetries.
So the fact that the potential borrower
knows more about themselves than the potential lenders.
And that there are two kinds that could
play a role in microcredit.
One, the economics lingo for it is moral hazard.
And the other, the economics lingo for it
is adverse selection.
So now let me translate what moral hazard is in English
and what adverse selection is in English.
So in English, moral hazard is the fact that I cannot observe
your action once I have given you money.
For example, you have a business.
I've lent you some money.
I don't really know what you're doing.
First of all, you could run away with it.
That's one thing you could do.
Or you could undertake some investment
but maybe a much more risky investment
than you would have undertaken if it was your own money.
So why would that be the case?
Well, if you borrow the money, the contract
is not that you repay a share to the borrower.
The contract when you borrow money
is that you give back whatever you have borrowed
plus some interest rate corresponding
to the cost of money plus some small change for operating
a bank.
So that's a fixed amount.
Now, if you run a business and you run a very risky business
and half the time you fail, then you have no money to reimburse.
Then what can they do?
They're not going to put you in prison for debt anymore.
So basically, you won't reimburse.
If you're doing very well, you repay your fixed amount
and then the rest of it is for you.
So the credit contract gives incentive
to the borrower to undertake projects that are perhaps
more risky than they would have undertaken
with their own money.
Because they are basically gambling
with someone else's money.
And they get the upside and they don't
have to pay for the downside as long as there
is limited liability, which is you
don't break people's kneecaps when they're [INAUDIBLE]..
So that's here the first difference
between the informal credit market and the formal credit
market, because the local money lender
can threaten to break your kneecaps
or can threaten to go and harass you or to be at your doorstep
until you've reimbursed.
Whereas the bank, what are they going to do?
They cannot do that.
Or if they do that, there was some scandal
at some point of Citibank using bad guys to intimidate lenders
into repaying their car loans.
But when this became known, this was a real scandal.
So the banks can't really do that.
That's the first difference between--
which make it possible for a moneylender
to lend to people and not the bank.
That's a first form of asymmetric information
between lender and borrower.
A second one goes under the word adverse selection,
which is something similar to what we encountered when
we were talking about insurance, which is the borrower might
know more about themselves and about the project that they
have than the lender.
So for example, I know that my project is pretty good.
So I know that mostly it's going to work out.
So if I can use my own money, I'm
going to use my own money to launch it.
But if I'm not too sure, I think the project has a good chance
to fail, then I would rather go with the bank's money,
because again, if the project fails,
suppose now it's not a matter of effort or taking the risk,
but it just happens to be something
I know about myself that I'm in a risky business.
The fact that I have to repay will encourage the people
with the most risky ideas to take the loan
and will discourage people with very safe idea
to take the loan.
Because the people with the safe ideas
know that they will have to repay most of the time
because things will work out as they expected,
whereas the people with the risky idea
know that they won't need to repay most of the time.
So those are two issues that might limit the ability
for a bank who has an office very far away in the cities,
et cetera, to lend to the poor.
Another problem is simple.
Is that lending to the poor is particularly costly.
Why?
Because a lot of the cost of administering a loan are fixed.
So you have to go visit the business.
You have to open a file.
You have to keep that money separate from the other monies
and so on.
Regardless of the size of the loan, it's the same amount.
That means that in proportion to the loan, it's bigger.
So the cost per dollar lent of lending to the poor
is larger than the cost per dollar
lent of lending to a rich person,
simply because for a rich person,
you can give them a larger loan and it's
spread over a bigger area, a bigger amount of dollar.
So in proportion, a larger loan is cheaper than a smaller loan.
So maybe the poor don't have projects
that are productive enough to justify the high interest
rate that you would need to charge them in order
to spread out all these costs.
And of course, these two things overlap,
because if there is moral hazard or adverse selection,
you need to spend a lot of effort trying
to make sure that the person is not running away
with the money.
You cannot give them too much, because you want to make sure
they have some skin in the game.
So you may require a collateral to make sure
that they have skin in the game, which means that a person is
only going to be able to borrow up to some amount of the money
that they can put as collateral.
That's the way that the bank is going to make it work out.
It's going to say fine, I'll lend you some money,
but at least some fraction of the project
has to be your own money.
So if the project fails, you're going to lose that as well.
Now, if that's the case, then a poor person
who doesn't have much of a collateral
can only get a small loan even if they have a big project.
So the poor will tend to have small loans.
But because the loans are small, the fixed cost
of monitoring the loan will be spread
over a smaller amount of money.
So the interest rate will look higher,
which first of all, means that some people will not
find it worthwhile.
Second of all, means that all of these problems of moral hazard
will become even larger because now they know,
oh no, I have this high interest rate.
So that makes me want to default even more.
So there is a multiplier effect coming from the moral hazard
component, which means that if the interest rate needs
to be high, they become even higher for the poor.