PROFESSOR: Today, I want to talk about credit.
So I'm going to be talking about the market for credit
in general and microcredit in particular, which
is, of course, one of the most visible interventions
towards the poor that has taken place
in the last several decades.
So in the 1970s and the '80s, many institutions, governments,
people had completely given up hope
on giving credit to the poor and being repaid.
There were still subsidized credit program, for example,
in India, but they function almost
like free transfers program.
So for example, in India, there was a mandated bank branch
expansion which gave money to programs like the ICDS program,
offered bank accounts to people, savings account,
but the default rate on its loan were super high, 42%.
And work by Rohini Pande and Robin Burgess
showed that it cost $2.72 to increase people's income by 1.
Those loans were subsidized loans,
but since nobody ever needs to reimburse them,
had become handouts, and therefore, become
very desirable, become political object,
and were used as political entities.
So, for example, work by Shawn Cole
shows that, in election year, whenever there is an election
plan, agricultural credit increases by 5% to 10%,
particularly in the district where the election is closed.
And these extra loans are not associated
with an increase in the productivity of the district.
So it doesn't look like they are particularly productive.
So if you took this class in the early '90s, you could have
had--
you would be justified to have the impression
that lending to the poor is just not working,
that, for some reason, it's really difficult.
And yet there has always been informal credit institution--
village money lenders, rotating credit and saving association,
which are groups of people--
sometimes they're called tontine as well,
where people four or five people get together,
and they put a pot in common, and they get the pot one
after the other.
So every week you meet, you each put $20.
So if there's five of you, that's $100.
One person gets the whole $100.
And sometimes, it's by rotation, or sometimes,
you can bid in order to get it earlier.
And when you're thinking of bidding to get the pot earlier,
it's really equivalent to borrowing from your friends.
And this rotating credit association,
village moneylenders, they get reimbursed, clearly.
So it's a bit of a disconnect between, basically,
governments or formal institutions given up
on lending to the poor and the fact
that there is an active credit market that is already existing
in the absence of legal guarantees.
Then, the microfinance revolution
happened, slowly first, and then in a big way in the '90s.
Muhammad Yunus created the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh
in 1976, first very small, and then expanded rapidly.
And it has expanded into a worldwide phenomenon today.
There are about 200 million clients,
very, very high repayment rates, very high interest rate.
We can discuss that in a minute.
Many microfinance institutions are profitable,
in that they don't lose money.
Some are very profitable.
For example, there is a famous case of a Mexican microfinance
organization, Compartamos, who had a very successful IPO
and made tons and tons and tons of money for its lenders.
So, on the one hand, this microfinance movement
was seen as both a successful social enterprise and something
that is good for the poor.
So Muhammad Yunus and the Grameen Bank
won the Nobel Prize in the very early 2000.
At the same time, it's also seen as a commercial success,
with some microfinance organizations starting
making a lot of money-- not necessarily the same.
In fact, Muhammad Yunus has always
been quite critical of organizations like Compartamos
who made money by giving microcredit,
saying it's basically betraying the spirit
of the microfinance idea.
And they're just like loan sharks.
But there was a bit of both, and it
was very popular with companies giving for investment
in environment, sustainability, and governance [INAUDIBLE],,
or ESG, which is the idea that you can, at the same time,
make money and do something that is good for the world.
So it's was one of these win-win.
More recently, there is a development
of a new wave of microfinance lenders using mobile money
platform.
So, for example, M-PESA, which is the Kenyan mobile money
platform has a credit product called M-Shwari
where people who have been clients of M-PESA
for a long time can have loans on M-Shwari.
They have better data because these people
are operating on the platform for a long time.
And they also have ways of getting reimbursed.
So it seems that the microfinance has--
of how well the microfinance was really
touted as a really wonderful success
of bridging this surprising gap between a vibrant credit market
at the village level and the inability
for governments to give subsidized loans to the poor.
So today, what we are going to do
is first try to understand why it was difficult for government
or for formal banks to lend to the poor and, two,
why are the various theoretical reasons why lending to the poor
might be difficult and to what extent
those difficulties are serious in practice?
Then we are going to see what innovation
did the microfinance revolution introduce
to overcome those difficulties?
So what did they do that was different that
made it possible to lend to the poor
from this institution of a microfinance?
So what did they maybe borrow from the informal lending
market?
So how come they managed to lend to the poor at fairly high
interest rate and get reimbursed?
And then, finally, whether or not the microcredit really
helped the poor and, if so, how, and if not,
how it could be made better--
like, what are the limits of microcredit.
So that's kind of the game plan for today.