PROFESSOR: So there has been a series of randomized control
trials almost all run around the same time that aim to provide
evidence on this question.
And those RCTs became possible precisely
because the language changed and the organization
felt, oh, we better have something to say.
There is a special issue of a journal that
was published in 2015 with six of these studies, one
in India, Ethiopia, Mexico, Mongolia, Bosnia, and Morocco.
And there is one a little bit earlier
than that which appears--
excuse me-- which appeared in Science.
So in these special issues, you have studies that
are in different continent--
in Europe, in Middle East, in Asia, in Latin America,
in South Asia, in Southeast Asia, everywhere.
There is urban and rural.
So for example, Ethiopia is a very rural area.
The study in India is in Hyderabad,
which is a huge city.
And they have two kind of randomization,
one is place displaced based omission,
which is you just randomize one neighborhood or one village
and you make the product available and who comes, comes.
And one is sort of randomization in the bubble,
which is people are scored, are given a credit score.
Individuals are given a credit score.
And then the people who are evidently ineligible
don't get the loan.
The people who are obviously eligible get the loan.
But people who are in the bubble, which is they
are the borderline, you randomize.
So that's another innovation of Dean Karlan, who
is the innovation person for today of making randomization
possible for businesses.
Is to say, look for people in credit scores
that are somewhere in the middle,
you really don't know what you would like to, whether or not
you should lend them.
So why not randomize?
So the first point is, the take up rate of microfinance
are not enormous.
So most microfinance organizations,
when you ask them when you enter in an area,
how many people borrow?
They will tell you 80%.
That's just a random word-- the focal point, 80%.
80%.
But in fact, it's not 80%.
On average, the first stage is about 10 percentage point
or so.
So people are not so excited by the product in practice.
So why is that a problem from the point of view
of running an evaluation?
STUDENT: There can be some sort of selection bias in there
because 10% is like a really low threshold.
PROFESSOR: So you definitely would have a selection bias
if you compared the 10% of people who borrow to people
in the control villages.
You cannot do that.
Because obviously these 10% are not
comparable to people in control villages.
So you would need to compare to 10% who
borrow in control villages, but you don't know who they are.
So you can't do that.
So what you need to do instead to avoid that is what?

STUDENT: Just randomly assign people.
I don't know how you'd do it because if they don't want it
randomly--
PROFESSOR: So you cannot give it to them if they don't want it.
But you can randomly sample people.
And out of 10 people you sample, one would have borrowed.
That means that creates two problems.
One is you really need to survey a lot of people
because a lot of them--
your effect on getting microfinance,
of being assigned to a microfinance village
is quite low.
So whatever effect of microfinance,
basically is going to be divided by 10 in your estimates
because you're going to compare 100 people out of which 10
got microfinance, 200 people out of which 0 got microfinance.
So it's like, you get your effect is
diluted by a factor of 10.
So that's a power issue.
You need a lot of people and a lot of survey.
And then it's also--
so that's the main issue, that it leads to imprecision.
And also, when you have something with very low
take up, you kind of always are wondering--
in fact, is this representative of what
you would have if microfinance was
much more widely available or more accepted
or something like that?
But in a sense, this is the state
of the world, which is not specific to these places.

So what does this study find?

I'm going to-- so I'm going to first give you
the overall point.
Basically, nothing.
So these studies, study after study after study
find no impact--
not positive, not negative, on the average person.
Now, we have seven studies that were done independently.
They each have enough power in principle
to detect some effect in the study.
But because of the sticker problem,
they might not be super precise.
So Rachael Meager, who at the time was a PhD student here,
was interested in answering two questions.
One is, can I combine all of these studies
together to get the effect of microcredit around the world?
Second, am I able to say whether the results are
very different from one place to the other?
Many of you have asked about randomized control trial,
about the question of external validity.
If I find a result somewhere, how much
does that tell me of what I would find elsewhere?
So here, it turns out we have a result.
We have a study in Ethiopia.
Is it informative about what happens in India?
Well, we should have a way to know,
because we have the study in Ethiopia
and the study in India.
So from these seven studies, can I say--
first of all, what would be the effect in another country that
is not in this list, on average depending on the data I have?
And how confident am I that the results are, in fact,
similar enough from place to place
to give me a good sense of microfinance impact anywhere
in the world?
The difficulty in answering this question is the following.
When we see variability from one place to the other,
it could be both because there is noise.
And here there would be a lot of noise
because we don't, because so few people take microfinance.
So if they happen to be really great in one village by chance,
it would look good.
So there is a lot of noise.
And also because the effect might be different.
So what Rachel did is to use Bayesian methods to tell us
whether what is the effect for the next village,
and what is the variability that I can expect on the effect.
So basically, to separate the difference
that I find from place to place between the component that's
just random sampling noise and the component that
is telling me the effects are quite different.
Also, the advantage of doing that is
that I can now shrink the estimate, which is I
can for India.
I have my point estimate for India.
But I also have all the others.
And I can say, well, to some extent what
I find in the other countries is also informative of what
happened in India.
And I can use that to some extent
once I know how much variability there is.
So that's kind of the effort.
We don't need to go into the detail of how it worked.
But we can look at the results she finds.
So this is across different--
so this is the expected point estimate with the confidence
range after shrinkage, so that when you use the other study
to tell you what the effect is.
And this is just pulling everyone and doing all this.
And what you're finding is that basically, there
is very little effect.
Zero is here.
And for nothing is the 95% confidence range
doesn't include 0.
So basically, we find no significant impact
on temptation goods, on revenue, on profit, on expenditure,
on consumption, or on consumer durables
across all of these studies.
The effects are not very negative.
They're not very positive either.
Just nothing happens on average.

This is for profit looking at the effect
for the countries by countries before and after shrinkage.
So the Philippines was the first study to be done.
It has a large point estimate and very large standard error.
When I use the other countries to get some extra information
for what the effect might be in the Philippines,
I find something closer to 0 and more precise.
And basically, this is profits on average.
We never find any effect on profits.
So basically, it's not super news for microfinance.
And when these studies came out, we
had a big event where we invited microfinance organization
to present at the World Bank.
And it was a bit of a kind of wake
up call for the industry saying wow,
our product is actually not working.
And you couldn't have gotten that from one study,
because you could always say, well, this one study,
there is that problem, that problem.
And in particular, ask the question of external validity.
But here we have all of the studies showing the same thing.
So that was the bad news.
The good news is that there seem to be quite a difference
between two sets of households, the household that had
a business before and the household that didn't.
When the household that had a business before microcredit
came in, we have actually pretty positive effect
for most countries except Mongolia and Mexico.
Whereas the houses that did not have a business before
have very, very tightly estimated zero.
There is substantial heterogeneity
in results across people.
So the study tells us that in general
for the average boy in the sample
microfinance does not do very much.
But there is a majority.
Some people do succeed.
And in particular, one measure of success
is whether or not they had a business before.