PROFESSOR: Let's now-- we have these facts, which
were suggesting that there might be more
hazard, adverse selection, lending to the poor
being costly, how serious empirically those issues are.
So the key inputs to answer this question
are, number one, whether the market interest
rates are higher than profit the poor could
make with their businesses.
So that would tell us whether it's hard to lend to the poor
because it's just too costly.
That's the number one point on the last question,
whether it's too costly.
A second thing that would be interesting to know
is whether high interest rates increase adverse selection.
So do I get more adverse selection
with high interest rate?
Do I have more default when interest rates are high?
Is there coming from moral hazard
or from people running away?
And is there ex-ante moral hazard in the credit markets?
Or are people taking more risk to start with when
interest rates are high?

So I'll go over a few studies that
shed light on these things.
So the first one is whether the high interest
rates are the problems.
So just as a reminder, we saw interest rates
being very high and also very variable.

Yet, the poor are willing to borrow at this very
high interest rate.
They borrow less, but they pay higher interest rate.
Interest rates are--
3% to 4% are very common.
We saw the vegetable sellers being
willing to borrow at about 5% per day.
So we do see that the poor borrow less,
but they borrow at super high rates.
And in fact, the poor pay much more
on their loan than the rich do.
And it's not irrational because they do that even
for production purposes.
So it's neither irrational nor a crazy level of impatience
or crazy level of needs.

So it doesn't seem their fault that the poor are excluding
themselves from the credit market,
because they don't have very good project.

And there is direct evidence on that from an experiment in Sri
Lanka.
I'll show that to you in a minute, very interesting
experiment by Suresh de Mel from Sri Lanka, David McKenzie,
and Chris Woodruff.
What that did is that, shortly after the tsunami in Sri Lanka,
there was money to help rebuild.
So they had access to money-- these people--
that could be kind of given away before it
became fashionable to give money away to people.
So they started from a census.
They identified about 400 households,
which had a small business.
It could be a shop or it could be a small manufacturing
business, with less than $1,000 in fixed capital.
And in general, they have less than that.
They have about $100 in machinery and stock.
They conducted a survey and they offered a random prize drawing
of a grant for the business of $100 to $200,
depending on the randomization, either in cash or in kind,
for example, an assets or stock.
The cash crunch were unrestricted in kind
where they went to the market with the person to buy.
And then they collected multiple round of follow-ups.
They had a very--
the results were that these businesses actually
seemed pretty profitable, at least for the smaller
loan, the smaller grants.
They found that the real monthly business profit increased
by about 60% per year.
So very high return, greater than the monthly interest rate
that these people had to pay.
So in this case, these businesses
were not paying 5% per day, they were paying much less
than that.
And they had access to this profitable investment
opportunity.
So this is their profit without the grant, with the $100 grant,
and with the $20 grant.
Another thing that's striking is that the cost
seems to be steeply decreasing because they don't seem
to be able to use the 200,000 grant much more
than, if anything the profit after $200 grant
is smaller than the profit after $100 grant.
These two are not statistically different,
but that suggests that the returns are very concave.
So there seem to be a lot of value to lend to--
there would be a lot of value to give or to lend money
to these small businesses.