PROFESSOR: So some facts that are
consistent with this idea, prima facie, is that, first of all,
the poor need to spend a lot of money to borrow.
We have data that we cobbled together for the Poor Economics
books with Abhijit Banerjee.
In a sample of 13 countries, we look
at various aspects of the economic lives of people
living under $1 a day.
And we find that people pay between 11% yearly to 93%
yearly as interest rate in the sample.
So that's a lot of money compared to,
say, your mortgage rate now, which is--
even though now the interest rates are high,
it's more of the order of 5%.
So that's the first factor, rates tend to be high.
A second factor is that they are not high
because the banks have to themselves borrow at high rate.
There is a sizable gap between the lending rates
and the deposit rates within the same subeconomy-- so
for example, the same city or even
the same industry within a city.
So if you put your money into a savings account in India,
you get barely enough to cover the inflation.
Sometimes the real interest rates
are negative for the savers.
That is, you put money and you get less
than the inflation in interest rate.
So it's very cheap for banks to get funds from depositors,
but then they lend it out at a huge interest rate,
so there is a big gap in between the two.

Another fact is that there is extreme variability
in interest rates within the same subeconomy.
So that means that you take, for example,
auto lenders in a particular town, and one of them
will borrow at 9% and one of them will borrow at 73%.
You take textile companies in the city of Tiruppur
in India, which is the maker of T-shirts,
there are different types of people.
There are people who are from there
and people who have come from all over the countries
because it's the maker of T-shirt,
and if you want to do T-shirt, you go to do them in Tiruppur.
The people who are local to the place
have access to funds at a much cheaper rate than the people
who come from away.
Even though the people who come from away
have come because they are particularly good at making
T-shirts, and the prima facie, you
would expect they are just better at it
and their business grow faster and everything,
they have access to much more expensive [INAUDIBLE]..
Now all of this could be due to the fact
that the interest rate could be very high
because the bank realized that they are only
going to be repaid very rarely.
So if you expect to be repaid half the time
and you get from your depositor money at 5%,
you need to charge at least 10% so that on average, you're
able to repay your depositors.
So it could be a reason why the interest
rates are very high, is because nobody pays them.
And so first of all, people would
be willing to accept this very high interest rate
because they don't need to actually fork--
they're not actually feeling very responsible for them.
And second of all, the people could--
the lender could say, well, I better
charge higher interest rate, otherwise I won't be able to--
my business will sink, my business as a bank.
But that's not the explanation because all
over the place in all of the reports, one thing that
comes up is astonishingly low level of default
within the informal sector.
So to a bank, when people borrow from one
of these subsidized bank and get subsidized loan,
often they don't repay.
The repayment rate I showed you before on the order of 40%.
But if you borrow from the local moneylender,
you do repay the interest rate.
So the interest rates are super high,
and people actually pay them.
In most of the case, people do not
borrow because they absolutely need the money, for example,
for consumption purpose.
Like we saw, Abu willing to pay very high interest
rate because his family was starving.
That happens.
But a lot of the cases where people borrow,
they borrow to finance their business.
So they borrow because they want to finance--
they want to buy inputs or they need production,
they need to buy some clothes to make T-shirts,
or they want to buy some seeds to grow some food
or something like that.
So that means that people must have access
to fairly good investment opportunity
and productive ideas because they
are willing to borrow at this rate knowing they'll
have to reimburse, and eventually for the most part,
reimbursing them.
So it must be, prima facie looks like, the poor have access
to a very--
at least some people have access to very productive investment
opportunity that--
and then they find some people to lend their money to do that,
but that's all operating in this very informal sector.
So there is a very nice study of one village in Pakistan,
descriptive study from the '90s--
yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] there is a high variability
in the moneylender's interest rate--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
STUDENT: Why [? doesn't ?] it equalize?
PROFESSOR: Right.
Great question.
So take the example of the Tiruppur--
take the example of the Tiruppur T-shirt maker.
And I gave you one dimension of this variability,
that the local people have access to money
at a much cheaper rate than the people who come from all
over India to make T-shirts.
So why do you think it's the case
that the local people get access to money at a cheaper rate?

Any suggestions?
Yeah, Liam?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] involved in taking their background.
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So what is happening with the local people
is that their parents, their uncles, their relatives, they
all have money because it's a relatively rich farming
community.
And then when Tiruppur became a T-shirt place,
they said, oh, we also want to get into this T-shirt business.
And then they started establishing their kids,
giving them money to start a T-shirt company.
And so you might have wondered why
do they give the money to their kids who have no T-shirt
experience and maybe no T-shirt competence
when there is all these people who are flocking into the town
to make T-shirt and they could have actually
invested the money with them?
And the answer is exactly what you're
saying, which is the asymmetry of information are less.
When you're lending to your son, you know what they are up to.
You can-- you have ways to persuade them to repay.
Maybe they will want to or even if it's a distant relative,
the local people have a better network of information.
Whereas if it's someone who comes from far away,
even though you think they're going to be pretty good at it,
but you have nothing on them if they decide to take off and go.
So that would be one reason.
And then they there could be others of the same each--
story has its own thing, but that would be one reason.
It has nothing to do with productivity.
In this case, in fact, it's negatively
correlated with productivity.
And everything to do with, in this case,
informal social networks and so on.
But you are exactly right to ask the right question
because in economics, we don't think these things should
be the case.
In fact, a standard assumption in economics
is that the prices play the role of signals
to allocate the resources to the right
Place.
So all the interest rates should be equal within an economy
because if you see an opportunity that pays more,
you should invest there.
And then as people invest there, invest in that opportunity,
the price will go down, and all the interest rate
will equalize.
So a standard presumption of a credit market--
and that would come out of most of the basic thinking
in economics, would be that the interest rate would equalize.
So it is very surprising prima facie
and I'm very glad that Julie pointed it out, that there
would be very diverse.
It is something we should be baffled by.
And so here, we find the same thing in [? Alim's ?] work.
It's only 14 moneylenders in one market in Pakistan.
It's well worth reading the paper.
He collected very detailed data on what they do to lend money.
And his idea is, are there-- because there was this concept
and you hear it in [INAUDIBLE] discussion
that he's really like as a real crusade against these people,
the loan sharks.
And in the Abu story, certainly the moneylender
didn't appear to be a very sympathetic character.
And what [? Alim ?] wants to do is to say, well,
what is their business?
Like how do they-- why are they charging that much?
Is it the case that there is only one in the village
and has huge monopoly power, and therefore,
can extract this huge interest rate on people
who really need the money?
Or is the cost--
or is it coming from somewhere else?
So what we first find is that in this one village,
there are 14 moneylenders.
So there is a lot of competition.
In principle, people could move from one to the other
if they don't like the prices that are given somewhere.
Then he describes every step of the lending process
and priced it.
So how long it takes you to visit the person's
house or their business-- place of business for the first time,
and to find out what they do and to generally monitor
their activities.
He finds that the average lending rate to people
is 78.5% per year, so it is very high.
Money is expensive for the money lender.
They themselves, their cost of fund is 32%.
Even though the bank rate is 10%--
so clearly they are not able to get all their money
from the bank, themselves get the money--
themselves are credit-constrained.
They get their own money and it is
available at an expensive rate.
We reproduce the fact that I was telling you is true on average
because the standard deviation of interest rate
is 38% across these 14 lenders.
That means that interest rate of 2% and 152%
are in the confidence-- in the 95% confidence range.
So huge variability within the same village.
And what it's but is it explained by default,
no, because very few default. The median default
rate for a particular lender is between 1 and 1/2 and 2%,
and the maximum default rate in the sample is 10%.
So in equilibrium, there is basically no default,
but that is because people spend a lot
of time doing ex-ante screening and ex-post monitoring.
What [? Alim ?] finally concludes
is that although there is competition,
it's imperfect competition because there is so much entry
cost for starting a relationship with a lender,
that once you have one, they have a monopoly
power over you exposed.
Once all this screening is done, you
don't want to move to another one
and do the whole screening operation again,
especially since what would the other lender think if someone
arrived to them, they would think
there is some adverse selection issues.
They would think, well, why do you leave your existing
relationship?
Did something go poorly?
Is it that you didn't--
so there is potential adverse selection
in leaving from a lender.
So once people are stuck with someone,
they are stuck with them.
And that would be another reason why
there is a lot of variability between lenders in how much
they can charge, because once they have someone there,
they basically have them.