PROFESSOR: Once we have done this experiment,
once we have the concept of doing this experiment--
and all of your questions were wonderful in terms
of going from the 30,000 feet description
to actually how they work in practice, which is where
a lot of [INAUDIBLE] get made.
But still many people have done experiments.
And we can start thinking about how
to combine the results from these experiments
to compare cost effectiveness across programs so
that our givewell charity, or our effective altruists
or government can actually pick not just
the most effective, but the most cost effective method.
The ideal way to do it if you had a lot of time and money
would be to run one experiment which
had all of the possibilities at the same time.
But it is difficult. So typically, the way
we try and compare programs is by accumulating
many experiments that we're running various contexts
and putting them on a common scale.
So for example, for participation of education,
you might be interested in how many extra years of education
do you get by spending $100 in a particular program?
There are many ways in which you could do that.
You guys have mentioned various things.
One that is very popular is conditional cash transfer.
So when people receive cash transfer that
are conditional on school participation,
you could provide school uniforms.
You could provide school meals.
You could de-worm children.
That's the discussion we were having.
And for all of this, you can ask the same question,
which is, how much extra years of education
do you get for having spent $100 or $1,000 on this program?
So for this, you need the impact evaluation,
which tells you how much extra years of education
you got in the context of the experiment.
And you need to have all of the costs
and then to take them on average over the number of people
who were treated.
So for example, to treat--
de-worming is super cheap.
So the cost per child per year is about $0.50.
And then if you treat a child, if you treat an entire school,
that will cost you $0.50 multiply by 500 kids,
and you'll get x number of extra years of education by comparing
the absence rate in the de-wormed school
to the non-de-wormed school.
So there are a number of things that
have been compared, school health, incentives
for students, informing parents about returns to education.
This is nice because all of you proposed this.
And then once we have that, we can
do a cost benefit analysis, which will require the needs
assessment.
It will require the process evaluation
because we need all the money that has been spent,
including what potentially has been wasted.
And it requires the impact evaluation.
So all of these are inputs into the cost-benefit analysis.
So the needs assessment gives you the metric
for defining the cost-benefit ratio, what's important,
enrollment, or learning, for example, or both.
The process evaluation gives you the cost of all the inputs.
And the impact evaluation gives you the quantified benefits.
And then when you have that for many programs,
you can use the cost of the program
to calculate how much it would cost to do it for 1,000 kids.
Use the pogrom impact to calculate
how much extra years of education
you would have gotten per 1,000 kids.
So for example, for the cost per child for de-warming is $0.50.
The increase in year of education if you de-worm
is 0.15 years.
So de-worming costs $3 per extra year of education induced
of $0.50 per year.
And for this $0.50, you get 0.15 years.
So it will cost you $3 per extra year of education.
So this is very different from the rating agency,
like Charity Navigator, gives you
a cost estimate for agencies.
But they don't relate it to the impact.
So they will still like de-worming
because it's so cheap.
But if you don't follow it to the impact,
you could do things that are extraordinarily cheap,
like sending letters to people.
If the letters will only work, it
will still only worth doing if it makes a difference.
On the other hand, you could do something very expensive,
but has a tremendous effect over people's lifetime,
even if it's one shot.
Then it might still be worth it doing it.
So the cost is not sufficient to say whether you want
or not to do this problem.
You have to have the cost and the impact.
And this is one way to do this.
So for the cost per extra year of education induced,
we compare these various intervention primary or--
this is the primary or secondary school conditional cash
transfer in Mexico.
You can see it has its own scale because per year of education
induced, it is very expensive, $6,000 for the primary school
CCT and $1,000 for secondary school CCT,
even though secondary school is more expensive,
but it has a larger effect.
And then all of the things to the left
are things that have been evaluated
in Kenya and India, which gives you
the cost of doing school uniform per extra year of education,
doing scholarship for girls, providing
an extra teacher in India, or providing de-worming
both in India and Kenya, and finally, our school meals.
And you can see that it is de-worming
that turns out to be the cheapest
way to increase education.
And what is funny is that it is not even
an education intervention.
And the thing that looks to be the most direct, like providing
girls scholarship or conditional cash transfer,
they are effective, but they are less cost effective.
So the intuitions we might have going into problems
are usually a little off because if we
think we want to keep school kids in school,
we have to do things that have to do with schools directly.
But in fact, there might be things
to do that, in this case, has to do with health and as
even larger.