INSTRUCTOR: Another type of things
we do is where in order to reach scale
is to work with government who are themselves already working
at scale.

I've already made a decision that they want to do something
but are confronted with what I call plumbing problems, which
are issues of implementation.
So things are not going the way they would like them to go.
I'll give you an example.
It's a program in Indonesia, huge program
of social support to families, called the RASKIN program.
They provide rice to families at very subsidized prices.
The program is financed by the center,
but it's implemented locally by local officials.
And the center was concerned that a lot of the rice
is stolen along the way or disappears,
and the people do not get the rice that they are entitled for
or they pay too much money compared to what
they would be entitled for.
So what they decided to do, what the government wanted to do
is to give every household a card that tells them
what they are entitled to-- how many kilos and at what price.
And their idea was that if the household have that,
they will know to advocate for their own rights.
And they asked researchers to help evaluate that card.
And so they went to see a group of researchers, including
Indonesian researchers and researchers from MIT,
and they said, yes, great idea.
But as long as we are going to evaluate this program,
why don't we try to see which version is the most effective?
So this is the card that they sent and they had posters
for advertising the card.
And they tried out four aspects of the card.
First of all, which information is present on the card?
So the card looks very, very similar on the slides.
But there is a tiny difference.
Do you see it?

Sorry.
STUDENT: The agency or [INAUDIBLE]..
INSTRUCTOR: Yeah, so the agency is there in both cases.
I guess it's not the same agency,
but imagine it's the same agency.
But in the content of the card.
It's in Indonesian, but you can still see the difference.
STUDENT: More information on the right card.
INSTRUCTOR: Exactly.
One piece of critical information
is on the right card, which is what?
You see it?
It is very small and Indonesian, but it's a number.
And this number is the price.
So one card has the price.
And one card doesn't.
That's one thing they changed.
The other thing is they changed who gets the card.
So in some villages, everyone who was eligible for the card
got it.
In some villages, they only gave it
to about half the households, and they
wanted to see if there would be spillover of information
across the other households.
In some villages, on the contrary,
they had those posters everywhere in the village
to create a common knowledge.
So the idea is that if you have a card, you know have a card.
But if you have a card and there are posters,
you know you have a card, you know that the village official
knows that you have a card, and the village officials
know that you know that they have a card.
So this changes the bargaining when
there is common knowledge about the information that is there.
And, therefore, it might potentially improve the outcome
further because it places the villager in a stronger
position.
And the last thing is that they wanted
to see whether it was about villager bargaining
or it was about the perception that someone is monitoring you
from above.
So in some cases, they gave just a card to the villager.
In some cases, the card was attached
with clipping coupons that the villager would
give to the program officials.
And there was this idea that the coupon
could be collected and monitored so that
would serve as a way of monitoring from above.
And what they found is, number one, all of these versions
work to some extent.
On average, the poor family gets 26% increase in subsidies
through getting more rice at a lower price.
It's driven by a reduction in leakage
that is not by some other poor family not getting it,
but from the officials themselves
getting less corruption.
And it is very cost effective.
It's very cheap to distribute these cards.
So it's $1 for $8 increase in subsidy.
They also found the best version,
which is to distribute it to everyone
and to put the posters.
And they found that the clipping coupons, et cetera,
didn't really make a difference.
So the channel was mostly going through improving
the bargaining position of the villagers, who
now could advocate for their rights in a stronger way.
Having found this result, the government,
which, after all, wanted to do something in the first place
and had contacted them to help them evaluate the program,
just rolled out the program starting in 2013
to almost 16 million families, reaching
60 million people total.
After that, they've continued the partnership.
The government of Indonesia very frequently
contact them to improve service delivery with other evaluations
of their programs.