PROFESSOR: So that's the first thing, which is don't really
typically go from one study in one
context to very general conclusion
that you blast to the world.
The other, and for that, I want to take the example of teaching
at the right level, which we'll study in details in class,
is that when you have a proof of concept,
when you have your first well done experiment,
in order to go from your proof of concept
to something that is scaled up at a national level
or at large scale level, it takes
a number of steps, including you, often, in my experience,
redoing experiments at that larger level,
where all of the problems that might happen when you try
to implement something at scale, including lack of enthusiasm,
including whether things persist over time,
and so on, you will be able to experience.
And if you experience them, then you
have a chance to solve them.
So I'll give you the example for teaching at the right level
very briefly because we'll redo it in class in details.
The big problem is that around the world,
most students now go to school.
But they don't learn very much.
For example, this is pre-COVID, it's
become much worse with COVID, less than half
of the kids who finish primary school can
read at the level of grade 2.
So there could be any number of problems.
But there are-- and there are actually a number
of experiments to show us that it's not that kids cannot
learn.
They are perfectly smart enough.
It's not just inputs.

It's not the teachers who don't care.
It's not the parents who don't care.
It's something simpler than that.
It is that the curriculum is not adapted to the kids who
are in front of the teachers.
That the curriculum is very, very demanding.
And the teachers are forced to complete
the curriculum, no matter what.
So they teach at this high level.
And only a couple of kids can understand what
is going on in the classroom.
And everybody else is lost.
So if that's the answer, then--
if that's the problem, then the answer
is that, oh, you should teach at the right level.
And the organization Pratham, which
is led by these two wonderful people, Dr. Banerji and Dr.
Chavan, they developed this program
where kids are grouped by level of achievement.
And then they are taught at that level.
And the groups are frequently reformed.

So that's the idea of the program.
And we've been working with them for about 15 years
to evaluate it.
First, we had the proof of concept in urban areas,
then in rural areas.
Then a little bit later, you will see it appear in Ghana.
Then we started working to try to scale it up
inside the government system.
During the summer first, and then
with a government teacher during the year.
And then in Ghana, and then what was interesting with this one
is that it didn't--
in school, it was done in the opposite way
that you would normally do an experiment.
So in an experiment, you start, you don't have the program.
Then you select a few schools and you run the program.
The way we run at scale experiment
is that Pratham was going to run in Bihar,
was going to do the project in Bihar,
which is a state in India, in an entire district.
And in fact, several district, four or five districts.
And we randomly took out some schools
where they didn't run it.
So now, you're running the program
at scale minus a few schools.
And what we found is nothing.
We found no difference between the school we had left out
and the school where Pratham was intervening.
And it was very shocking because it's
a program that we had evaluated in many places
and always been working.
So we were puzzling over that.
And we realized that the problem is teachers
were telling us it's nice.
I like the program.
I like having been trained in teaching this way.
But I don't have time because I have
to complete the curriculum.
So basically, there was a political economy problem
which we didn't have in the small experiment
because we could be with them and work with them.
But in the full scale implementation,
the spirit was lost because they were still
under the same pressure to complete the curriculum.
So having learned that, which we could not
have learned if we had not run the experiment at scale,
we decided that we were going to work with Pratham to change
the program and to now include the teacher supervisor as part
of the program, train them as well.
So that the supervisor could support and monitor
the teacher in the implementation of the program.
And also reserve a specific block of time,
either in the day or in the year,
in order to implement the program.
And when we did that in Haryana in 2012, 2013,
we found the effect came back inside the school system.
So now, we had a program that we were ready to scale up.
And to scale up in a form that could
where the graph could work inside an existing government
system.
So after that, there was scale up in India.
The program now touches something
like 6 million children in India every year.
And then with a grant from one of these effective altruism
type bodies in Africa.
So the African team went to India.
And the Indian team went to Africa.
And there is a Pratham-led new organization
called Teaching at the Right Level Africa
that is helping countries across the continent
to adopt the program.
So that's the way in which--
that's an example of you don't just write your policy brief
and step down.
There are a lot of problems with scale up, which can themselves
be treated as this engineering/plumbing
problem of trying to make the solution work on a large scale.