
PROFESSOR: So RCT stands for--
STUDENT: Randomized Control Trial.
PROFESSOR: Randomized control trial.
So the idea we asked here is that, OK,
I want to understand the allocation to either getting
the program or not getting the program.
So I'm going to take a set of schools.
And I could select poor schools, or I could select
poor schools who have applied.
Or I could have different groups in fact
because I might be interested in the effect
for poor schools in the effect for richer schools to compare.
But then within my lot of, say, poor schools where someone
applied, I'm going to randomly assign whether or not
they get the program or not.
That now creates a comparison group
that's not systematically different
from the participant group--
one that's not subject to selection bias.
And therefore, I can compare treatment and control.

So why is that true?
That's true because of the law of large number.
Of course, any individual is different.
So any individual school might is still going to be different.
So if I decided between two schools,
and I picked one to be treatment and one to be controlled,
there could still be any number of differences
between these two schools and between the students who
study at these schools and their conditions.
So if I compare what happened to my two schools,
I will still be hard pressed to say it's only
coming from the program.
It could, in fact, be coming from any number of factors.
But when I have a large number of schools,
this idiosyncratic differences should
even out across my entire set of schools.
And that means that, on average, there
is no reason why a treated school would systematically
have higher or lower attendance than a control school
except that the program took place.
So we can take, say--
so how large is large is an interesting question
that we are not going to get into right now.
But 200 we can consider to be reasonably large.
And we are going to randomly split them into groups of 100.
And then we can split them and measure participation
in school, test scores, all of the things you said.
We can start splitting by the level of poverty in the school,
by something about the teachers, by the characteristics
of the students.
And we'll get a rigorous measure of impact.
So the question is, how large is large?
And it has to be large enough that you can
apply the law of large number.
That is where differences will even out.
So 2 is clearly not large enough.
I would argue in the case of schools,
10 will not be large enough.
And then the question is whether is 20 going to be large enough?
Is 100 going to be large enough?
Is 10,000 really too much money to be spent just
on an experiment?
That's going to determined to be--
that's going to be highly dependent on the outcome
and on how variable it is.
So if you have very precise outcome, then
even a small sample, any difference you
can say really coming from--
is coming from the treatment.
If you have things that are super noisy, like,
how much people consume, for example,
which vary across a number of factors,
you're going to want to have much larger
samples to make sure all of this randomness evens out.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Is like villages opting out of the study
often a problem?
PROFESSOR: That's an excellent question.
So when you randomly assign, say, chicken
to vaccination program against avian flu,
they have no say in whether or not they participate.
So when you do a randomized evaluation
in veterinary science, it's pretty simple.
It's exactly what I'm saying.
You take your 1,000 chicken, and you randomly assign them
to treatment and control.
With human beings, it gets much more complicated
because they will choose whether or not
they want to participate at an individual level
and at a group level.
So here, for example, a school could say, thank you very much,
but I'm not interested in participating the experiment.
Either they don't want to be in the treatment group,
or they don't want to be in the control group.
So they don't want to share data if they are not treated.
So this poses some--
both of these caused problems.
And both of these caused problems
that are statistical problem that can
be handled to a certain extent.
So for example, if people reject the program--
so you offer your school meal program,
and the teacher says I'm not interested.
When you do your analysis, you are still
going to say, well, let me treat them
as I have-- my program is not really doing a school meal.
My program is offering the school meal to the school
because that's the only thing I can really do.
And people will take it or they won't take it.
So we call that intention to treat.
I had the intention to offer this program.
And we compare people who were intended
to treat to people who were, in fact, treated.
And sometimes, the opposite can happen,
which is a control school teacher might
see that, oh, there is this school meal program,
but I'm not part of it.
Let me see whether I can find it elsewhere.
Maybe there is another organization
that will give it to me.
So some of the people and the control group
might end up being treated as well with school meals.
Again, you're going to keep them for analysis
purpose in the control group.
And you're going to hope to maintain
a difference between the two that is sufficient
that your intention to treat will
be related to a difference in actual treatment.

STUDENT: How can you tell if the two groups are actually
separate groups?
Because perhaps there are connections between villages.
So if you apply treatments to one village,
it could spillover to a village that's
supposed to be in the control group,
making them naturally different.
PROFESSOR: So this is another excellent question,
which is all of this works really nicely, as long
as there is no interaction between villages.
But sometimes, there might be interaction between villages,
which would lead to--
which might lead to contagion between the two.
So for example, it's less clear with school meals,
but take the example of--
actually, let me see if I can make it work with school meals
since we are talking about school meals.

Yes.
So suppose that you start from a setting where
a participation in school is really extraordinarily
low, where people haven't really started to come to school,
and then you introduce school meal in 100 schools.
And the students stop coming.
And once they stop coming, they realize that actually there
is all sorts of interesting things that happen in school.
And then they talk to their friend and they say,
you know what?
You should go to school.
Even if you don't have a school meal,
there are other things that are quite cool about what's
happening in school.
And in this way, they persuade their friends
in the control group that there are other reasons
to come to school.
Then your treatment effect of the school meal,
is it going to be too high or too low?
STUDENT: Too low.
PROFESSOR: It's going to appear to be
too low because the fact of being near a treated school
has a positive effect, so the control group moves up.
So that's an example that would work with school meal.
A less contrived example is--

and actually a real example is, there
have been many, many evaluation of deworming
programs inside schools.
And what they did is that they randomized
at the individual level inside each school.
So that's nice.
You give deworming to some kids and not some other.
It's very easy to organize.
You don't have to get many schools to get many kids.
But what was the problem with that design?

STUDENT: Kind of they want the entire community.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
By deworming half the kids, you've dewormed everyone.
Warms are extraordinarily contagious.
So if half of the kids don't have worms, then, first of all,
they're going to get it back from the control group,
but also they'll just be much fewer worm
in the entire community.
So Michael Kremer, a few years ago one,
of his most famous project is one
with Ted Miguel where they moved from individual level
randomization within school to school level randomization
to control the externalities.
And even then, they showed that there is still externalities
even across schools because of one's
traveling even within the village.
So you need to pay attention to this potential externalities
that might bias your results.
And again, there are things we can do.
And along the way when we study various programs,
we are going to see them.
Yeah.
STUDENT: How much do we know of the change in people's behavior
once they know that they're part of the program?
So for example, do they instinctively or consciously
or consciously perhaps change their behavior
once they know they're part of the treatment group or control
group?
And how do we control that?
PROFESSOR: So another excellent question
is the very fact that you're part of an experiment,
changing your behavior in a way that would not spill over
to when the program is permanent.
So that's a little bit related to the question that you asked
earlier, which is, it a one-time effect,
or is it something that we can expect
to see have an effect for over the long period of time?
If it's really due to the excitement
of getting this special program for a year,
then it might not last.
So this is called Hawthorne effect.
Apropos by some experiment where supposedly they
were trying to-- they were experimenting
on the lighting in factories.
And so they wanted to see whether when the light is
higher, people are more productive, perhaps
because they are more happy or more.
And they did this-- so supposedly, when they did that
and they informed people, people became more productive
just by being observed.
I'm saying supposedly, because there
have been re-evaluation of the original author and effect.
And it is also an experiment.
And it is argued that there is no author
effect in the original [INAUDIBLE] experiment.
But the point remains valid, which is if you do find--
if there is, in fact, it is temporary effects then,
your evaluation in the confines of the experiment
might not spill over more generally.
In practice, when they have been measured,
they seem to be very, very limited
and last for like one weak or something like that,
and then things go back to normal
so that it might not be a problem in many settings.
But it is something that we need to keep an eye on.