PROFESSOR: So when we started, I gave you
the rationale for doing impact evaluation by asking you
to think of a policy problem.
And by telling you a government wants
to pick the best policy to fight absenteeism and encourage
enrollment.
And you can help them do that.
But then I also mention that, in fact, impact evaluation
is not that frequently part of the policy process.
So you might ask yourself legitimately,
how do you go from evidence to policy?
And does anybody care about the results of a randomized control
trial, and are the type of limits
that we have discussed about randomized trials,
are they standing in the way of actually making policy using
randomized control trials?

So here's the strawman.
And to be honest it's not a ridiculous strawman,
or at least I don't think it's a ridiculous strawman
because my idea when moving into randomized evaluation
would be that it would work more or less like that.
But it's a strawman for reasons I'll explain.
So the strawman would be you're interested in these school meal
questions.
You run a small well controlled experiment.
Such experiments have been run in several countries perhaps.
You find your result. You prepare a shiny policy brief
with a colorful photo.
And you peddle the results to policymakers.

They are convinced, and they adopt the program.
And they scale it up.
So that might sound naive, but that's a little bit the way
I was thinking when I started doing
randomized evaluation that this is
roughly the way it would work.
And this strawman has been subject to all sorts
of critics.
First, is that, oh, this small well controlled experiment
are gold-plated.
People are getting very excited to be part of an experiment,
for example, or the staff is excited
and they do it very well.
But once you scale it up, it's not going to scale up as well.
It doesn't last.
The samples are too small.
The results, you have them in one place.
But how do they are valid in another place?
They might not replicate elsewhere.
They might not even-- if they are
issues like non-compliance like spillovers,
like people attrition, they might not even
be valid internally.
But even if they are valid for your experiments,
how do you know that what works in India will work in Kenya?
How do you know what works in Kenya will work in Mexico?
And should you also apply the same thing in the US?
Then those could be really important questions.
Even if you were convinced that these results were valid
internally and externally, once you prepare your policy,
your policy brief, maybe it doesn't come at the right time.
Policymakers always have their priorities.
They don't care.
Nobody's going to pay attention.
And if they decide to adopt it, and they adopt it at scale,
the result once adopted at scale might
be totally different from what you've
estimated in the experiment for the reasons
we mentioned already, but also because once you do things
at scale everything changes.
Suddenly, you might have market effect, for example,
school meal might lead to an increase
in the price for cereals that they provide in the school.
So prices for food increases.
Or if everybody goes to school more, the returns to education
will fall down.
So there are this general equilibrium effect
that you didn't have in your experiment
that you will see in practice.
There are also political and economy effect
that you couldn't capture at a small level, implementation
difficulties that will only be met
when we are moving at scale.
So basically, it's hopeless to go from a small experiment
to a large one.
So obviously, I don't fully believe
in either the strawman or the critics,
otherwise I wouldn't be where I am.
And the reason is that it's really not the way that policy
influence works.
The first one is that it's not true
that you move from one experiment,
and then with one experiment you convince the world.
You need more than one.
So let me tell you one example.
For each thing that I'll tell you
what is important to affect the policy process,
I'm going to give you an example of a topic.
So one example to demonstrate that you
don't need one small experiment but several is microcredit.
So microcredit was a big deal when you guys
were in primary school.
It was Muhammad Yunus received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2006.
It was microcredit, microfinancing
changed world measurably.
It was supposed to solve everything, et cetera.
Then towards 2010, the tone started to shift.
There were new stories about a debt trap
for microcredit clients, people committing suicide because
of too much pressure from microcredit agency, the limits
of microcredit, the Bangladesh case.
And what was striking in this is that we didn't really
have evidence to say one way or the other.
Because during the Google period of microcredit,
the microcredit organizations were really keen
that there should not be an evaluation.
They thought things were going very well.
They were generally making money because people reimbursed.
So the argument was why, do you need to evaluate?
Because we are making money anyway,
so we are just like a market like another one.
So they refused to do evaluation for the most part.
And then the people who didn't like microcredit also
didn't need evaluation, because they
were doing their description and isolated some terrible cases,
and then generalized across the whole microcredit portfolio.
So the first evaluation that we have conducted
were precisely when you started to get
this shift from super hype to criticism
of microcredit movement.
And some microcredit organizations
started being interested in showing
that they had positive impact.
So two evaluations were conducted
in India and the Philippines.
In Philippines, they found small positive effect.
In India, I was involved in this evaluation,
we found no impact across the board.
But India is a very unique context.
We did a study in Hyderabad, which
is a hotbed of microfinance, basically where
they invented microfinance, or at least for India.
Since Muhammad Yunus kind of regenerated in Bangladesh
first, and then it came to India.
In India, Andhra Pradesh and Hyderabad
are really, really important for microfinance.
So you could say, well, the people
who were not part of the experiment had a chance to get
money elsewhere, for example.
So maybe this is too special.
So what we did when we got this India result I was involved
in the experiment, is we took the decision to not communicate
about the results whatsoever.
So just lie low and wait until other study came up
from different contexts, which were not as intensely
blanketed by microcredit organization,
to see whether this was different.

And then I set my antennas out, and waited for other studies
to come up.
And different team came up with different studies.
One study came up in Ethiopia.
One study came up in Mongolia.
One study came up in Bosnia.
And when there was enough, I contacted all the teams.
And I said, why don't we publish them all together in one
place with the same outcomes?
So someone can actually compare in very different contexts
the impact of microcredit on the same variable.
So they agreed.
And what you have here in blue are
the effects estimated in each of these things on profit,
along with confidence interval.
And the bottom line from the blue
is that there is not a single site where the confidence
interval doesn't meet 0.
So it looks like all of the effect,
so you can see how the Philippines had
this modest positive effect, but also very
large standard errors.
Are and then all the other sites basically are close to 0,
except perhaps Bosnia.
Once you have these different studies,
you can also do a little bit more than just comparing them.
You can ask yourself questions like,
are the effects really different statistically.
Are the effects very different from one study to the other,
or do all the studies want to say the same thing?
And my student, [? Rachel Meager ?]
worked on that, actually and she's
working with a lot of people in the CS department here at MIT.

And they started looking at the effect,
or she looked at the effect, for example,
for profit across all the sites.
And you can see basically it's a 0 everywhere.
And then pulling all of the sites together,
what type of effect do you find on revenue, profit,
expenditures, consumption, consumer durable,
and also [INAUDIBLE] goods, or are people wasting the money
or on the contrary wasting less money,
once they have microcredit?
And the bottom line once again is
that basically across none of the outcomes
do you find much of an effect, particularly when
you exploit the fact that you have all of these studies
together to get to a more precise estimate, which is what
she's doing in the red curve.
So the conclusion of her work was that with seven studies,
we can know that number one, all of the studies
seem to be saying roughly the same thing.
And number two is that there is not
much of an effect of microcredit,
either positive or negative, on average.
That said, there are some people who
benefit and seem to benefit across sites,
and there are the people who started
with having already a business, so the really
entrepreneurial people.
So we learned something finally.
Having learned that, so we now started
communicating a lot on these results,
because we were confident in them.
We are confident they were not exceptional.
We also could make our case because we
were across continents, rural and urban contexts, richer
and poorer places, and so on.
So these studies got published and what
was really impressive is that even
the press was able to see the delicate balance that, OK, it
doesn't have great impact.
But it's not terrible either.
It doesn't do harm.
And there are some people who benefit.
So for example, the Economist Magazine titled
to say a [? Partial Model. ?]
So it is not terrible.
It is not perfect.
It's a bit of a difficult message
to convey in the media, who prefers
to have something drastic to say one way or the other.
But it becomes possible once you have several studies
in different contexts.

So then it moved from maybe it allows
us to have all of these results, first it changed the debate,
and then it changed microfinance.
Because one of the things that people
realized having done that is that what's important
is not so much to say whether microfinance as implemented
following the Muhammad Yunus model of a group of five
exactly doing that works or not.
What is more interesting is how you make it work better.
For example, do you go beyond microcredit
to think about microfinance--
transaction, savings, insurance, ultra-poor programs--
various things that we are going to see in this class actually.
You move from does it work or not to how to make it
work better, because you have enough clarity
on the first question which is in the current setting it
doesn't work great.
How can we make it work better?
Focus on heterogeneity, creating methods
to identify real entrepreneur and to help them,
since we saw that for them it makes a difference.
So what makes economics useful is
that we get a result in the current state of affairs
microcredit is not good, or not great, but we don't stop there.
We use what we know to try and work
with microcredit organizations to develop better
versions of the same program.
And this is really now the way that the field
has been moving on this question of microcredit.
And it would not have been possible with one study,
find the answer, move forward.