PROFESSOR: Let's start by organizing these questions.
There are different types of questions in this list
and in everything you've raised.
Some of these questions are needs assessments.
So needs assessment, is it really needed?
For example, is nutrition really a barrier for kids
to come to school, or is it the case that [INAUDIBLE] and food
is not the problem?
People prefer to eat at home anyways,
and you need to do something else.
So that's your formative time where you're saying,
is there even a need for this policy?
Many things can probably be ruled out at that stage.
Then there is the process evaluation,
which is how is it going?
Is this policy implemented and run as we hoped?
So which kind of questions in what I raised come
into under process evaluation?
In what we discussed earlier, what
are the type of things that you could consider to be a process
evaluation question?

Yes.
STUDENT: Whether there's food wastage.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, whether there is food wastage,
whether the food's actually even needed, and so on,
would be processed information questions.
And then there is an impact evaluation question
which you raised in various ways by already providing me
a solution to the impact evaluation question.
But does it make a difference compared
to doing nothing or compared to doing something else that is
in a potential menu of option?
So it needs evaluation.
We might ask ourselves, who is the targeted population?
Is it for everyone?
Is it just for the poor?
We need to answer this question because that's
going to affect the final budget of the program
as well as equity consideration.
We need to ask ourselves, what's the nature
of the problem being solved?

So what is the reason why kids are not going to school,
and will school meal really solve it?
So this goes back to your idea of asking
people what they think.
What is it that prevents them to come there
to bring their kids to school, and is a school meal
going to be addressing this barrier or not?
We need to answer this question-- why?

STUDENT: I guess if you don't know
what the problem is, you're much less
likely to be affected policy.
If you find out, oh, the school meals are not
going to help the kids regardless-- like,
the parents don't believe that it will help.
They're not going to send them, even if you do.
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
You could try.
There are many cases where you dream up a program from Boston,
or even from the capital of a country
that it seems to make sense from your point of view,
but it really doesn't make any sense
from the point of view of the experience
of the people on the ground.
And then to start with, it's very unlikely
that there would be any impact of such program.
So here, for example, it could be that some policymakers
really think people are so poor that they
can't feed their kids.
But in fact, it is really not a constraint.
But what's really important for people
is that kids can go safely to school every day,
in which case, just from the formative research
and the needs assessment, you will understand
it's not even necessary to try it out.
And then how the service fits the environment,
and how do you embed this program in the existing
machinery of providing a school?
So for example, if there is a school meal,
someone has to cook it.
Who is going to cook it?
Are the teachers, are they going to be comfortable cooking it,
or do schools have kitchens?
Do they have water?
Do they have a place for kids to wash their hands,
and so on, and so forth?
The type of implementation question
that might seem very pedestrian and boring,
but nobody thinks about and is often the difference
between success and failure.
So this is your needs evaluation,
and it's going to come up before you do anything
to even give you an idea of whether or not
this is something you might want to consider.
And that's very important, because a lot of things
could be culled out with good needs evaluation.
For example, the idea of putting computerized computers
in schools, which you could do a needs assessment
and realize 90% of the schools don't have electricity,
so computers don't need to be sent.
Once you have done that, if the program has launched
another type, another series of questions we ask
have to do with process evolution.
Are the services delivered in the way you intend?
Are you spending the money?
Are you actually delivering the meals
or is the food wasted or lost somewhere?
Are the children actually eating them?
Can you do better?
In the process evaluation, can you do this better?
Can you improve the cost effectiveness
of the way you deliver the program?
Can you replace, for example, expensive inputs
with less costly alternative?
Can you replace costly inputs with labor?
Can you play with delivery methods.
For example, in school meals, a big debate
is whether you should cook the school
meal in a centralized kitchen and send them
to all the schools or whether the kids should--
or whether each meal should be cooked in the school itself.
I don't have an answer to this question,
but it's going to affect the cost.
It's going to affect the quality.
It's going to affect the desirability in ways
that needs to be documented.
And then once you send the meals,
are children spending the entire day-- children and teachers
spending the entire day cooking and eating instead of learning?
Are the services reaching the right population?
For example, someone asked whether there are hole
in the coverage of the program.
Suppose that you are only able to implement such a program
in pretty well-organized communities.
then it could be that with this kind of program,
you're actually reaching the places that
are the wealthiest and not the places which have
a real large absentee problem.
So all of that can be done by once the program
is up and running.
So the needs assessment, you should do before one policy--
you in your capacity as figuring out the right solution
would do before you even launch the program.
The process evaluation can be done
as the program is moving along.
And it's typically done--
for most programs, it's done more or less while,
but it's part and parcel of running programs.

And then you have-- at the end, you
have a satisfaction services.
You can ask a teacher, student responses to them.
And usually, you stop there-- or one stops there.
So you do all of these things.
You write a report.
You wouldn't do such a thing because you
would have taken this class.
But the auditor comes, and do all these things,
write a report, and say, it's a A-plus program or an A program,
or a C program in term of how well it's being run
and it's cost-effective--

the way it's managing its budget, and so on.
But then, of course, there is the impact evaluation,
which is what you guys have raised,
which is the key question, what we really
want to know in order to recommend this policy is
suppose I manage to do it properly
and implement the program in a way that is scalable,
that's not too expensive, that's well-received.
Do the school meals cause the students
to attend to school more?
That's my challenge.
And then we could ask, what's the effect on attendance,
on attending school is both being enrolled and attending
regularly.
So what's the effect of enrollment versus attendance?
What's the effect on learning, or perhaps what's
the effect on health?
Who is the effect on who?
When you ask about are they whole in term
of the impact of this program, it's not just about coverage,
but it's also about differential effects.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I feel like we also need
another impact question regarding the post policy
impact.
Like, what happens after we stop subsidizing
meals and that kind of thing?
PROFESSOR: You could ask the long-term effect,
although maybe your government could
be interested in potentially doing it forever.
But I think you have exactly the right question, which
is, what's the dynamic effect over time?
The first question that you raised
was whether or not-- how long the effect
lasts over time, assuming the program stays in place.
And you could also ask yourself, I've done a one-shot program.
Does the program stay in place later,
or is it that it needs to be sustained over time?
So that would be another absolutely other impact
question.
So impact across people, impact over time.

Impact evaluation is really important.
You would think it's obvious that when we run a program,
all of the needs assessment and process evaluation question
are really key.
But really, the proof of the pudding
is whether or not the program makes a difference.
Is there a difference as it's being run,
or as you point out, a difference that maybe lasts
even longer than the program?
But does it make a difference compared
to having done nothing or compared
to doing something else that I could do with the money?

So although that seems like it would be a very natural thing
to do, it is actually really a part and parcel
of running a program.
Usually, you run a program.
And if you're lucky, you have a process evaluation,
but you don't have an impact evaluation.
And as a result, we have surprisingly little hard
evidence on what works.
And the evidence that we do have is often
based on asking general impressions,
or how the process evaluation pans out,
or what people kind of say about it.
And yet it's a pretty essential question for the debate on aid,
but also on public policy.
Do we know that anything that can be done is working?
How do we identify what works?
How do we maximize the return to dollars
and how to pick what really works?
So since I taught at MIT, there is a very strong presence
of a computer science.
If there is a very strong presence of computer science,
there is a very strong presence of people
who are going to go into tech.
And among people who go into tech,
there is a very strong presence of effective altruism.
And the idea of effective altruism
is that you are going to make a lot of money
and then spend it in the best way possible to help people,
to help the poor.
Impact evaluation is critical to any effective altruism mission,
because otherwise, how do you know that you're putting
the money to the best use?
It's also, of course, critical to any good policy-making,
so it's a critical question for government.
The reason I raise it is that it is very likely that people that
many of you will be exposed, if you haven't been already,
to the idea of effective altruism.
And you will see that we have a champion of effective altruism
in the room.
You can go talk to her.
And you will then know that in order
to even to be able to go to effective altruism,
there is a notion of effective.
And that's related to impact.

Then you have an organization like GiveWell,
for example, whose motto is, we search
for the charities that save or improve life the most
per dollar.
So for that, we need to have an idea of exactly the same type
of the questions that we were asking ourselves virtually.
What is the policy that will increase enrollment or learning
the most per dollars?
For that, we need impact.
We need for each policy, what is their impact compared
to doing something else?
And, of course, what is the cost?
Once we have impact and cost, we can do cost-benefit.