
PROFESSOR: Today, what we are going
to do is going to be really helpful for setting up a frame
and for us to use for the entirety of this class, which
is how do we think about evidence
and why the power of evidence in changing policy
and in particular the power of randomized control trial.
So the first part of it is, why are social experiments helpful
is they help us finding out what works.

But why do we need to know what works?
In this class, you're going to see many instances where
we are going to talk about randomized controlled trials,
or social experiment, or randomized experiments.
Today, what we are going to do is
to discuss what is a randomized experiments
and why they are important--
[INAUDIBLE]
So let's be concrete first.
Let's take one example, one policy problem
that if you are a policymaker you
might be interested in addressing,
which is trying to get kids to come to school more regularly.
First of all to be enrolled in school but also to show up.
So if you are a policymaker, what might you consider?
What could work?

STUDENT: Transport.
PROFESSOR: You could offer transport to people.
STUDENT: You could add incentives
like the deworming or free bednets or something.
PROFESSOR: You could have incentives for people
to come to school.
One way in which people do it is, for example,
by offering school meals in the school
or transfer to the parents.
You could add a deworming, which is not necessarily
just an incentive, right?
When you deworm a kid, you may-- in fact,
that might be a counterincentive because they don't particularly
want to take a medicine.
But on the other hand, they get less sick,
and therefore they'll come more often.
Or you could have straight, kind of good incentive
like providing bed nets for example.
Yes.
STUDENT: You could launch like informational campaigns
for the parents.
PROFESSOR: You could launch informational campaign
where you would inform parents, for example, about the benefits
there is to go to school.
What else would you do?

Yep.
STUDENT: You could offer to feed the kids.
Like two meals a day.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
You could offer to feed the kids.
You could give school meals at the school, which,
A, would act as an incentive, and, B, would make sure
that they have enough to concentrate and to fight
diseases.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Pay the families if the kid attends school.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
You could give a financial incentive
in the form of a small payment or a large payment actually.
This has been done, for example, to make
financial assistance, cash transfer, social cash transfer,
conditional on showing up in school.
STUDENT: It's kind of more long term,
but if you improve the resources of teaching
and the quality of education at school,
parents might be more likely to send their kids there.
PROFESSOR: You could increase the value
of sending kids to school by increasing
the quality of education.
So you could hire a better teacher.
You could train the teachers better.
You could have more resources in the school.
That makes education more helpful,
and therefore people would show up more.
STUDENT: The government could offer a pathway
to a higher-paying job than normal.
PROFESSOR: You could-- which would
be conditional on education.
Yes.
So you could, for example, say that they are--
if a particular child reaches some level of education,
they would be entitled or they would have a chance
to get a higher job.
So, for example, in India, it has
been done for lower castes, formerly disadvantaged castes,
and still disadvantaged in reality.
But there are special classes of employment
that are reserved for some castes or some other groups,
but they also need to have some minimum level of education.
So in practice, this serves as that.
STUDENT: Make it illegal not to go to school
or some kind of punishment.
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
You could [INAUDIBLE] education compulsory.

Someone mentioned-- one the first idea that was mentioned
was the idea of reducing transport costs.
That can be done in a number of ways-- for example,
by building schools, by adding school bus,
by letting people board.
And as we think about cost of education,
there might be other costs that parents
have to face, like uniforms or books or something like that.
You could pay for all of these things.
So there are many, many ideas of what
you could do to increase school participation.
You mentioned a bunch.
Now, suppose that you are given full freedom
to pick the best of these policies
or maybe a combination of the best of these policies.
And then, whatever is the best policy,
the government commits to scale up in the countries.
You are given some time to figure it out--
let's say three to four years to come up with the best plan--
and you're given some money--
some resources-- to try things out.
What questions do you need to answer
about each of these policies to know whether to recommend
them or not?

STUDENT: To actually increase learning, not just attendance--
so they increase test scores.
PROFESSOR: So you need to know their impact--
their first order impact-- which is attendance but also
potentially the second order impact,
which is what you might care about,
which is learning absolutely.
But you need to know their impact.
What else might you want to know?
STUDENT: If the policies are doing
any harm to the community.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
Is anybody-- it's a form of impact as well,
but is there unintended consequences,
not just on the people who get it
but who are directly exposed but perhaps on other people?
STUDENT: How easy is it to implement both in terms
of cost and scalability?
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
Is it feasible?
What are the costs?
Is it hard to implement?
Is it a policy that is popular in a country that people
[INAUDIBLE].
All of that enters into the feasibility of the program.
STUDENT: Unrelated to that, but how sustainable
the policy is-- like if you can keep
it going for a number of years.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So it's related because it's the cost.
It's the ease of implementation.
But that feeds into this question of how long
can you keep it going.
STUDENT: If there are gaps in who's still not going to school
and what fills those.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So not only what is the average impact but how they impact
varies across different segments of the population.
Are there groups that you are completely isolating that you
could reach to other policies or perhaps that you cannot reach
in any ways?
That's the [INAUDIBLE].
STUDENT: Just how effective your policy is to reach the goal
you want to have compared to the absence
of that specific policy.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
STUDENT: So really, just a comparison
to see how compared to the input you're putting
and to the absence of that policy and what the result of
[INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So that's the very nice way to spell out
the very notion of impact, which is
what is the outcomes with the policy compared to not doing
anything, or potentially, in fact, compared
to doing something else.
You could have-- since you have an area of policy
that you have to choose from, what
are the ones that work the best, and what
are the ones that work the best for the money
that you are putting in?
So, for example, if we choose-- so
we can see that there's a lot of questions to ask.
So if we pick just one example--
someone mentioned school meals.
So if you mention school meals--
I think you picked that idea of school meals--
for school meals, how do we--
go back to the suggestions you had
and try and make it concrete.
What do we need to know about school meals?

If I propose I want to test--
I want to try out-- school meals,
at the end of my try-out period, what
do I need to know if I should go ahead and recommend the school
meals?
STUDENT: How much did it cost you?
PROFESSOR: How much it costs.
Absolutely.

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] increase [INAUDIBLE] after [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the way you spelled it exactly
is the increase of attendance after the school meal.
That's already very specific.
I like also the way that Angela [? spelled ?] it
as saying what is the attendance with the school meals compared
to what it would have been without the school meal.
So that's the effect of the school meals on attendance.
And someone mentioned before, as long as we are at it,
we might be interested in other things, like learning and stuff
like.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Maybe you could not only
do the effects but the trend line of the effect.
Because what if it's some policy the media effect is really good
and it's starting to go down, so you--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So we might want to look at the effect over time.
That's related to the question of sustainability
that I think you raised, which is do I get permanent effect,
or is just some enthusiasm for two years And--
STUDENT: You'd want to control group
to see the direct effect of this removal.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So it's not something we want to know,
but it might be something that is going
to be needed in finding out who wants
to know how there is an impact.
STUDENT: Is it scalable?
Can you do it on a very large scale.
PROFESSOR: Is it scalable?
So that's related to how hard is it the implementation was.
In the case of school meals, there is the procurement--
how hard and easy it was to get the food to make the meals to
is there a lot of wastage?
Is there corruption?
Are kids lacking food?
Are parents lacking food.
And all of these things go into this idea of will we
be able to scale it up.
Yep.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].
I was going to say, in this case,
since you want to come up with the best plan,
you should compare the school meal plan to other plans
as well.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So we might say, well, we need that for school meals,
and we need a control group that doesn't get school meals.
But then, how about the other things you've proposed?
School meals or school bus?
School meals or deworming?
School meals or uniform?
School meals or money to people?
All of these questions we're going
to need to answer potentially for a number of the options
that are in front of us.
STUDENT: Oh, I just want to say that we
can compare how school meals were related
to performance of students.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So not only-- this comes back to we
want to know not just the effect on attendance
but the effect on performance.
Which could go either way because it
could be that people attend because of the school meal
but they don't learn anything, in which case
that's not worth it.
Or, in fact, because they have the school meals,
they learn even better.
So the impact is greater than what we might
expect from attendance alone.
STUDENT: Just overall sentiment about the policy as well--
like talking to different people and seeing
if they're excited about the idea of getting meals
for the school.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So what do people think about it?
What do teachers think about it?
What do children think about it?
What do parents think about it?
Is it something that they view positively or not?
Because that's going to, of course,
count into entering sustainability, the ability
of scalability, and so on.
So I don't know if I answered all-- if I put on the board
all the questions you asked but I think a fair amount.
One thing we didn't say is whether they
are better nourished, whether they come to school,
whether who gets the benefits is something
you raised when we were talking about it in the abstract.
But you didn't raise in the case of the school
meal, but are the poor kids the ones who really benefit or do
we leave people out--
the people whose parents cannot send them to school even with
the school meals?
Do the kids learn more?
Et cetera.