PROFESSOR: And in fact, what we find
is that these types of interventions
are helpful for increasing people's sleep.
I can show you this here.
So here you see the control group sleeping
about 5.5 hours per night.
And you see in the treatment group some people,
this is just devices plus encouragement just
to say you had earplugs, eye shades and so on.
And we encourage you to sleep more.
That increases sleep by about 20 minutes.
And if in addition, you also provide people with incentives
sleep goes up by something like 33 minutes.
OK.
So people sleep more.
That's actually pretty large effects.
This is larger, for example, than compared
to say sleeping pills and so on that
actually don't work particularly well in RCTs
as measured by sort of studies.
However, what we find is that the effects here all
are about time in bed or driven by increased time in bed,
not by increased sleep efficiency.
That is to say if you look at people's sleep efficiency,
I told you before sleep efficiency is about 70%.
There's no effect whatsoever on sleep efficiency.
What does this mean?
It means essentially that people are not getting better sleep.
The sleep looks still like this here.
There's nights looks still something like this.
What we're doing, we're adding some time here
or we're adding some time here.
But the patterns look like very similar as before.
So the sleep quality remains the same.
We increase the length of the night or the time in bed.
That increases overall sleep.
If you stay more time in bed for a given sleep
quality or efficiency, you're going to sleep more
but you're still going to wake up all the time at night.
Notice that this was not necessarily what we intended.
So we were kind of-- we were hoping for increased sleep
efficiency, it just happens to be that what we find
is that sleep efficiency does not go up.
OK.
Why is that?
Perhaps it's because people are still really worried,
people are still-- many people sleep in the same room.
Notice that we only-- we address only some
of the environmental condition but not all of them.
They might still have lots of worries or stress,
they might feel a physical pain, there's still many people
in the same room and so on.
So anybody wakes up, everybody else essentially in the room
is probably waking up.
So perhaps sleep efficiency doesn't go up
because we haven't addressed all of these conditions.
OK.
Now, notice that this is also true in the middle
of the night.
So if you look at sleep at the fraction of our sample
that's asleep say at 3:00 AM we find no difference
between treatment and control.
You might think then, well, maybe people
are just watching TV at night or whatever and so on in bed
and that's what we're picking up.
Sleep efficiency is low even like in at 4:00
AM in the middle of the night and so yeah.
So what does that mean?
Essentially it means that the entire increase in sleep
comes from more time in bed.
And that means also there's high opportunity costs
and increased sleep.
What does this mean?
Essentially it says if you want to sleep an hour or more
if your sleep efficiency is very low you have to spend quite
a bit of time in bed to do so.
It seems like people have a mix of going to bed early
or staying in bed longer, less time watching TV,
socializing, using cell phones, exercise, and so on.
OK.
So that's kind of the effects on people's sleep.
So we have a night sleep treatment
that essentially is effective in increasing people's time in bed
and therefore their sleep.
We also have a nap treatment where
essentially we offer people the opportunity
to nap at our study space.
That's sort of very nice.
There's AC, it's very comfortable.
It's like quiet and gender separated, quiet and so on.
So people take quite a bit of advantage of that
and sleep for about 13 minutes.
The nap treatment groups naps about 13 minutes per day.
OK.
So now we're going to look at what
are these treatments do on a range of outcomes,
in particular work outcomes, productivity, labor
supply, earnings, and so on.
But also a bunch of other measures
such as well-being, happiness, decision making, and so on.
You had a question?
STUDENT: Yeah, just to clarify something.
In the nap treatment, they can sleep as long as they want
or are they told look you're--
are told beforehand how much they can nap and does that or--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so we have a nap treatment group
and there's control group.
A nap, there's like a time slot that's about half an hour
where you can nap for up to half an hour.
People happen to end up napping about 13 minutes
of this half an hour, which includes some people who
don't sleep at all, some people who sleep say 20 minutes
or 15 minutes overall.
And then we compare the nap group
to people who either just taking a break
or people who are actually working through the break.
That's important because when you
sleep you can't do other stuff and there's
sort of costs of sleep and that could
be, in fact, quite important.
It turns out that when you look at work outcomes in particular
when you compare naps versus breaks,
naps look great because during the break people can't work
and naps actually improve productivity.
When you compare naps to working through the break,
naps still increase productivity but the productivity effect
is not large enough to overcome the time spent napping.
And that's kind of in some sense quite important
because essentially sleep has benefits and costs.
Sleep researchers tend to focus just on the benefits not so
much on the costs.
So now if you are like say studying
for an exam on the following day and you're totally unprepared,
if it's 10:00 PM you might say, well, sleeping well
is important because you need to be awake in the morning.
That's true.
But of course, when you're sleeping you can't study
and so there's trade offs that people have potentially.
Having said that, you should all sleep well.
OK.
So here's what we find.
So here's the effects of the night sleep intervention.
What I'm showing you here is essentially
treatment effects on the Y-axis that
are standardized in some way.
First, we look at work outcomes.
There's no positive effect on work outcomes.
If anything, there's like negative effects.
Why are there negative effects?

STUDENT: Work less.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, people spent more time in bed.
Now, that time has to come from somewhere.
They essentially either arrive at the office later
or they go back home earlier because they just
have stuff to do.
And if you spend an hour or more in bed
or about 50 minutes more in bed you
have to cut down on some activities.
It turns out that people actually
cut down on some work time.
So people are a little bit more productive,
but that's not significant.
They work less.
The output goes down a bit and their earnings also
go down a bit.
So overall, there's no positive benefits for their work.
If you look at health outcome, physical well-being
as we call it psychological well-being,
we find essentially no significant effects.
Overall, the index is essentially a 0.
We find no effects on cognition, attention,
and measures of time, risk, and social preferences,
kind of how people make decisions
over time and with others.
You can also try to aggregate this to some overall effects.
So take all of the outcomes together
and try to sort of merge them into one index.
And essentially there's like no effect overall.
I'm going to talk for a second on how to interpret this.
But the main reason why we think that's the case
is because sleep quality is quite low.
So if you have really low sleep quality
it really doesn't matter whether you sleep half an hour or more
or not because sleep is just terrible.
Our sleep quality is just terrible.
And then improving sleep quantity doesn't do very much.
In contrast, these are the effects of the naps.
First, let's look at work outcomes.
Productivity goes up by quite a bit.
It's something 2% to 3%, which is pretty high.
It's pretty hard actually to increase worker productivity
in this type of setting.
Labor supply goes down exactly for the reasons
that I just said.
Notice that this is comparing here people
to the average of the two groups.
So if you split this up for nap versus break or nap
versus working through the break, nap versus break
would look better than this because essentially there's
no negative labor supply effects.
But nap versus working through the break is bad.
So essentially people are more productive.
They spend less time working.
The output goes down a bit.
So overall, it's kind of not happening very much.
Notice that this is over the course of about a month.
So if you were able to study this longer,
if people were adjusting their labor supply in some other way.
So what essentially you find is the treatment group
naps and then spends a little bit more time at the office,
but the treatment group spends about 30 minutes
overall napping.
That's sort of their nap slot.
And then they leave the office 5, 10 minutes later.
But you could, in principle say, well, people could in fact just
leave the office half an hour later and adjust their labor
supply accordingly.
We find some evidence that over time that happens.
So perhaps if you did this experiment
for a year or something then the nap group here
would also look better, these labor supply effects
would go away.
But at least in the short run there's
clear costs in terms of how many hours people are working.
Then we find some effects on physical well-being.
People feel healthier, they miss less days at work.
And psychological well-being, people feel happier.
They're just doing better overall.
We also find effects on increased cognition.
So people are better at attention tasks,
they pay more attention to their incentives at work and so on.
You also find some effects on preferences or measures
of preferences, in particular measures of time preferences.
For example, we have a task at the study office
where people can essentially save money at the office
and get high interest rates for doing so.
When people have napped, they save more money
than when they have not napped.
So essentially, it seems to be that people
tend to be more patient and think more about the future
when they are better rested.
And when you put all these things together
we find sort of a pretty clear overall positive effect.
Napping seems to improve a range of outcomes, including
productivity, including attention, including well-being
and cognition.