PROFESSOR: OK.
So now we talked a little bit about happiness and well-being,
but how might you even measure happiness and well-being
overall?
If you wanted to figure out how happy is your friend,
how are you going to do that?

Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you ask them.
Good.
Now if your friend is American, they're
going to say I'm doing great.
So now how do you find out whether your friend
is really happy?

STUDENT: Could you observe them?
If they are crying they are not happy.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you can look at emotions.
Exactly.
You could look at facial expressions and so on.
What else?
Yes?
STUDENT: I don't know if you can do this with neuroscience,
but can you just know the dopamine levels or something?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you can measure, essentially--
for example, you can measure things like stress and so on.
You can just measure--
Mikey has studied neuroscience so he might know more.
You can measure at least some stuff
that's indicative of people's emotion in some ways.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Hormonal activity in general, I think,
can [INAUDIBLE] estrogens or cortisol.
I mean, you just--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
For example, there's some studies
people have done to measure cortisol as a sort of biomarker
of stress, and if people are stressed generally
they're not particularly happy.
Any other ideas of what we could do?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Can we maybe talk to them over time
and then see the slight variation
that we have a normalization.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I think that's what generally people try
to do, where generally if you look
at places in different countries,
if you look at Germans they would generally tell you
they're not particularly happy and so are pretty grumpy
overall.
If you look at people in the US but in particular also
in South and Central America, you
would find people generally would
report higher levels of well-being and so on and so
forth.
And so then you might say, well, that's not
necessarily indicative of people's actual well-being,
but perhaps we can look at differences over time
or across people within a specific place that
picks up more cultural or other types of reasons why people
report things differently.
Yeah?
STUDENT: I don't know if this is feasible at all,
but sometimes being confronted with an image of yourself
or the description of yourself might give you
a lot of perspective.
So I mean, sometimes either seeing
a picture of how you look or hearing
a description of your life might make your answer much more
honest and realize--
I don't know how feasible this is, but just--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I'm wondering about surveys.
Yeah, I think just telling people about--
asking people about their lives in general
and seeing then how they react or how enthusiastically they
might sort of report that.

Might be feasible to do.
That's not necessarily what people have done,
but in principle that's one one could do so.
So I think we talked about most of these you can
have sort of observer ratings.
There's some interesting work in the Media Lab
and so on that look at facial features or videos and so on.
They essentially try to predict are you happy based on that,
like how much do you smile and other sort of ways
in which people move their faces and so on.
Also, then real time self reports or retrospective self
reports of mood, pain, pleasure, happiness, and so on.
There's sort of stuff like heart rates
and so on that we can measure.
There's also vocal measures, measuring of brainwaves,
et cetera, that people have tried
to at least do to try to predict how happy people are.
Now in reality, what we often do is use survey questions.
One of these survey questions that people
have been doing-- there's questions usually about life
satisfaction.
This is to say how satisfied are you
with your life as a whole overall, which
is more saying you sort of evaluate your life overall.
And then other questions more like affect questions,
which is more about, say, happiness, which is to say,
did you experience any happiness or joy or pain,
et cetera, yesterday or so on?
And then there's other measures that are
more on the more extreme scale.
If you wanted to know whether somebody has,
say, anxiety disorder or depression,
you could ask screening surveys that ask people about those.
Those are more sort of extreme conditions, if you want,
that are specific conditions that
are very much correlated with well-being as well.
Now, some people say we should just use these happy measures
instead of, say, GDP or at least how use happy
measures directly as policy objective.
Anybody see a problem with that or what's an issue with that?

Instead of GDP we could just say,
let's just measure happiness.

Yeah?
STUDENT: It seems much harder to get an objective measure as
opposed to something numerical.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Exactly.
It's harder to have an objective measure,
and it's also easier to manipulate.
And there's some interesting studies, for example,
like a classic old study that looked
at the correlation between general happiness and happiness
with dating.
And what they did is they asked people--
just sort of randomized, essentially,
the order of these questions, and they
asked some people first about the happiness
in their dating life and then they asked them
about their general happiness.
And for others they asked them first
about the general happiness, and then asked them about happiness
with dating.
And what they find is if you ask the general happiness
question first the correlation is
0.16, which is relatively low.
It's much higher if you ask it second.
Why is that, or what's happening here?

Yeah?
STUDENT: If you ask the question about dating first,
they've already formed an association with happiness
in your mind, and that's more likely--
you're going from specific to a specific versus
if you're going from the broader to the more specific,
you're going to have less correlation
PROFESSOR: Right, so to be going from specific to broad
versus the other way around, but why does that matter?
STUDENT: Because you're more thinking
about the specific thing when you're
talking about your happiness.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So if you think about your general happiness,
if I ask you, how are you doing overall?
You might have many things in your life.
You might have how well are you doing in classes, how
are your friendships going, how are things with your family,
how is your dating life, and many other things that make
you happy or unhappy overall.
And somehow if I ask you in general, how happy are you?
You might give me a weighted average
of these different components somehow.
There's a question how to aggregate these, which
is who knows, but you're going to aggregate them somehow
in some ways.
Now, if instead I ask you first, or anybody first,
about their dating life, they're going to very much focus
on their dating life and put--
that's made very salient.
And then arguably what's happened here then
is that that gets a lot more weight compared
to other characteristics because that's top of mind
or that's what people really think about when
answering those questions.
Now, that's not to say one shouldn't use these questions.
It's just to say that they're more easily manipulated,
say, than GDP data.
Notice that GDP data is also being manipulated generally,
in particular, in autocratic societies as people
have shown with very nice nightlight type of data.
However, it's sort of we trust these numbers
more than questions about happiness.
But nevertheless, of course, we can learn a lot about--
from questions asking about happiness directly.