PROFESSOR: For what it's worth, let's
look at questions about life satisfaction.
What you see here is questions on life satisfaction.
This is a self-reported answer to the following question,
"please imagine a ladder with steps
numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the top.
The top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you.
The bottom of the ladder represents the worst
possible life for you.
On which step of the ladder would
you say you personally feel you stand at this time?"
You can think about what you would answer to this question
right now.
Maybe don't answer that during lecture,
because maybe then whatever my lecture quality is
might affect your life satisfaction.
But in general, I think it's worth
thinking about what would even answer to those questions.
What you see in these types of figures here,
now-- you see essentially averages across countries.
And what you see in general is that North America,
Latin America, and Europe tend to-- and Australia--
tend to do a lot better.
This is green or darkish green type of areas.
Well, if you look at other countries--
in particular, in Africa-- you get more
into orange or red territory.
So that's to say that people in rich countries
enjoy higher happiness and life satisfaction.
This is very robust.
You can ask very different questions.
Generally, you find-- essentially,
you will find that people in richer countries
will report that they're happier, that they enjoy
their life more, and so on.
That's a very robust finding across places.
Yeah?
STUDENT: How are people that are surveyed
in these sub-Saharan countries in the red
and the dark orange-- how are they able to empirically
understand their [? lower? ?] Because I feel like if you live
somewhere where everybody is making $2 a day,
and they live off $2 a day, how would you
be able to understand that there's opportunity out there
to live off more.
Because if everybody around you is living in a similar manner,
and you're asked, are you living your best
life, how do you know that--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
That's a great question.
So I think you're asking several questions.
And I think so first, you might say, well,
who are we even surveying, and do we even
have survey data for everybody?
Notice that here are some gray spots here.
These are countries that are actually not surveyed.
There's no data.
Generally, these Gallup or other types of organization
try to have representative data.
That's to say they try to have actually-- they
put in a lot of effort to make sure
that we have a representative sample of people
who are being surveyed.
Then you're asking a second question, I think--
or maybe that was the only question-- that's asking well,
do people understand this question?
Or how do they translate this question properly?
And so on.
And I think you're exactly right that in a way,
the question as it did ask here--
it's "what's your best possible life that you could have?"
and so on--
is very subjective, and frankly I'm
not quite sure how I would answer this question myself.
Now, you would think that the forces that you are talking
about to say, well, if I'm in a village in an African country,
I might say, well everybody is poor.
So my life is actually pretty good,
and I just don't know, necessarily, how rich people
are in other places.
So I'm going to rate myself higher than I otherwise would.
Notice that what you're saying [? that ?] would actually
in some ways, if people knew how rich people are
in other places, they would probably
report even lower numbers.
So in a way--
in some sense-- what you are measuring here,
if the surveys are not properly translated or just don't really
make that much sense to people, you
would think that, if anything, the true numbers here should
be even lower than in reality.
But I think the other answer to your question
is there's also a bunch of other questions,
such as these, that people ask just
about how satisfied are you with your life as a whole
these days?
Or, are you happy right now?
And so on.
And those types of questions tend
to generate quite similar answers in terms of patterns
at least across places.
So this is-- as you said, that's around the globe.
Now notice that if you ask these questions--
so this is now looking at-- this is more systematically
similar to what we just showed you before,
but now plotting, essentially, GDP on the x-axis
or on a log scale and life satisfaction on the y-axis.
And what you see essentially like a very clear relationship
that essentially says, the richer a country
is, the higher people's self-reported life satisfaction
is.
And notice there, you could even look at-- we see here
in different colors-- you see essentially different
continents, for example, and blue colors.
You see the African countries, you see Europe,
and you see even within those types of color patterns,
you see an increasing slope, which
seems to say that even if you take
into account cultural issues.
Or just issues about knowledge and other types
of understanding of questions and so on,
you see, essentially, increasing patterns, essentially
to say richer countries are happier.
Now in addition, what we can do is
we can look at countries over time.
As countries-- so this is cross-sectional
at one point in time, comparing rich places to poor places.
Instead, what you can also do is you
can look at growth over time.
And this is a very nice plot.
It's a little funny, but I think it's actually quite effective.
What it does, essentially, is to say take any country
that we have here, and look at the slope
at as the country grows.
How does happiness change?
And what you essentially see is that overall,
so countries grow-- as in once a country grows,
they go to the right--
if you see the arrow being essentially increasing,
that means essentially that happiness goes up.
Let's say we survey people in one year,
and then in the following year, we see in the following year
the country is richer, then we will
find that people are also happier,
report higher levels of happiness.
And you see, essentially, almost all of these arrows
in all the places, essentially, are sort of upward sloping.
That is to say as countries grow,
their citizens report higher levels of well-being.
Does that make sense?

OK.
Now-- so this is about measures of life satisfaction
and happiness and so on, which is
sort of a general measure of how people
are feeling about themselves.
Another thing you could do is you
could look at things like prevalence
of depression and anxiety.
Now, these are more extreme conditions
that are more rare in the population overall.
So at each point in time, something 3%, 4% of people
experience depression or anxiety at any point in time--
or each 3% to 4% have depression, about 3% to 4%
have or experience anxiety disorder.
And then you can look at within a given location,
is it the case that the rich or the poor
have more symptoms of, say, depression?
And what you see here-- this is from India
for income quintiles-- and we essentially
see the lowest income quintiles, the poorest
fifth of the population, has the highest prevalence of, say,
depression in this case.
That's also true for anxiety.
That's also true for suicide.
They tend to negatively correlate with income as well
as with employment.
And so broadly, the poor are about 1.5 to three times
more likely to experience depression or anxiety compared
to the rich.
Of course, that varies across places, and so on.
But it's a pretty robust correlation
within a given place.
That's to say, if you go to a given place
and look at the rich versus the poor,
you will find more symptoms of depression and anxiety
among the poor compared to the rich.
Now, one thing I haven't done is to say, well,
now-- you might say, well, OK, so maybe we should just
focus on economic growth.
Let's see if [? once ?] [? countries ?] grow,
everybody will be happy, and then maybe depression, anxiety,
et cetera will go away.
In fact, that's not the case.
So the graph that I showed you from before about happiness
and self-reported well-being, that
is very much upward sloping essentially for any measures
that you can think of.
When you do the same-- and I don't have this here,
but when you do the same for depression or other types
of symptoms, in fact, you will not
find an increasing an upward sloping graph.
Anybody have any ideas of why that might be?

So if you just look at the cross-country prevalence
of, say, depression and anxiety, you
will find essentially that [? richer ?]
the slope with respect to income, if any, is flat.
If anything, it might be negative, even.

Yeah.
I think you can always compare yourself to others, no matter
where you are.
So maybe no matter which country you're
in the, the lowest income quintile
is going to have higher rates compared to the highest
quintile.
Yeah.
That's exactly right.
So here, for these types of conditions,
notice that what's in here is relative comparisons
and absolute comparisons, in some ways,
in the sense of, say, you need to satisfy a certain--
the richer you get, the more things you can buy,
the more things you can do, and so on.
You improve your absolute living conditions.
And that seems quite important for overall happiness.
A second component is relative comparison within countries.
And so that might also affect people's happiness.
So mixed in here is also changes in inequality--
richer countries more unequal than poorer countries.
But it seems like that doesn't seem to matter so much here.
When you look at depression and anxiety,
however, what might be really quite
important is not so much just the levels, but also
the relative levels.
So if you're poor, or relatively poor
compared to others in society as we show here,
then that seems to be quite damaging
for people's mental health.
If you're absolutely poor, in a sense of just
don't have money, that might also be important, but perhaps
somewhat less important compared to these relative comparisons.
Any other ideas why this slope might not
show up across countries?

This is getting back to what Evan was saying earlier.
It is about measurement.
So you might say, well, measuring
depression and anxiety across place
is very different than the way people report
certain conditions, et cetera.
Or the way they're measured, even if it's translated
properly, might be hard.
And so there might be measurement issues.
We don't think it's just measurement issues,
but I think there's also some issues about trying
to measure this very well.