PROFESSOR: So today, we're going to talk about the psychology
of poverty.
First we're going to talk about what
I'm going to call the myth of the happy poor,
which is sort of the idea that the poor are all very happy
and it's not so bad to be poor because everybody is like just
happy and enjoys their lives.
And in fact, perhaps more so than the rich.
Then we're going to talk a bit about financial concerns,
the idea that worries about money and whether
worries about money--
that people have lots of worries about money if they're poor,
and whether that now affects workers productivity.
So the idea that being poor itself
might have some effect on people's ability to earn money.
And then I'm going to tell you a little bit about some work we
have been doing on sleep among the urban poor in India.
OK.
So first, let's just start with thinking a little bit about how
might poverty affect well-being do we think the poor are--
and I, perhaps, already gave this away,
but do we think the poor are happy versus not,
or why might we think the poor are happy versus not happy?
What are some reasons why we might
think they might be particularly happy or not happy,
compared to the rich?
Yeah?
STUDENT: In a way, there's this idea
that in a rural, bucolic context,
you might be happier away from the concerns of work,
not have a stable work that tortures you
or not have that much.
So there might be this idealistic view that once you
not hassled by the rhythms of the day-to-day life,
then that also fast-paced, you might be happier in a simpler,
more--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You might say, oh, there's all these stresses of urban life
and of our stressful jobs and so on.
And if we all just went back to living in villages,
it would be less stressful and maybe more restful
and people might be happier.

Any other thoughts?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You might be super stressed
because there's no safety net.
Yeah, [INAUDIBLE] a safety net makes you less
stressed on the day-to-day if the weather
goes bad, [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Right.
So there's essentially-- there's two things,
I think, you are saying.
One is there's lots of uncertainty in the sense
that lots of shocks are happening.
And two, there's less margin for error in a sense
that if you have another shock, you're
one shock away from just not having enough money to eat
or just not having enough money to pay for your medical bills,
to get health care, and so on.
And if you're very rich, you might have a lower uncertainty
in a sense that you might have more ways
to purchase insurance or other ways in which you're like
more diversified and so on.
But in particular, even if shocks happen,
you'll most likely be fine because you
have more margin for error.
Anybody else?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You might be worse off because you
have to make more decisions throughout the course
of the day, just about, is this necessary [INAUDIBLE]..
A lot time, if you're better off,
decisions are made for you by your employer.
So there's more decisions that go into your day-to-day.
PROFESSOR: Interesting.
Yeah.
So there's more for you to decide.
You have more responsibilities, in some ways.
I think that's right.
There's fewer defaults that society
sets for people that automatically bring them
into the right direction.
One good example might be health insurance, automatic savings,
and these types of provisions that in many,
at least in the US or in Europe, in many places,
many of the rich at least have access to almost automatically
unless you opt out explicitly.
Yes, Lucas?
STUDENT: Well, it could be--
unhappiness could be limited though,
by the fact that they don't have as much access to information
and therefore, not as much access
to comparison, like comparing themselves to other people.
PROFESSOR: Oh, that's really interesting.
Yeah so, I think that's an interesting idea.
So as you might say, well, you live in a village,
say in India, and everybody is relatively poor, so there's, A,
I guess, and I think you were implying that lower
inequality in some ways.
And there's less of other people being
much richer than you are, this rat race and who's
the best and the most educated and this and that,
while in rich areas, that might be much more the case.
But then second, I think you're saying
there's also less information in some ways,
and why we in general think that information is good.
Knowing stuff is good.
It makes you better off in various ways.
Perhaps knowing a lot about inequality
and how rich other people are and how good
or how smart and good looking, et cetera,
everybody else is might be sort of accentuated
if you have more information, be that through social media
or direct contacts in cities and so on.
Interesting.
Yeah?
STUDENT: I think one thing that I
imagine would be big is also how you relate to your children
in the sense that you know that you perhaps don't have
the means to provide them with the future you would like
to provide them with, and that might
be a big source of unhappiness, or--
PROFESSOR: I see.
So that would be interesting.
So that would be like aspirations directly,
where you say, well, you want your children to become rich.
You want them to be healthy and so on.
And that might be like a burden on parents
if they think they don't have so many possibilities in life,
for example, because school is not available.
Anything else?

OK.
So I put down quite a few negative.
Parts one, most obvious part is material deprivation
in some way.
If you're poor, you just can't buy stuff,
and buying stuff generally makes people happy, just
being able to buy whatever you want to buy, be that household
necessity, be that issues related to health care,
be that clothes you want to buy, be that presents
you want to make other people.
Lots of things you just can't buy if you're poor,
and that just buying things overall, at least in general,
makes people happy.
There's more exposure to environmental factors,
for example, noise, environmental pollution,
sleeping conditions, et cetera.
And all of those things always factors
that make people less happy.
If you constantly are exposed to lots of noise and pollution,
that's not going to be good for your well-being.
We talked a little bit already about health.
Poor health is a very clear predictor of well-being,
in part, because of physical pain.
So if you have health conditions and have lots of physical pain,
then that's bad for your well-being.
There's also lots of worries about health,
worries about health condition.
There's also lots of early death in low-income countries,
as we already discussed-- under-five mortality and so on.
It's extremely traumatic to have a child die, for example.
And that's just really bad for well-being,
and that just happens much more for poor people
than for rich people.
And certainty in shocks, we already talked a bit about.
There's also lots more physical pain
but also mental pain coming from painful and undignified work
in some ways, in the sense of work that
threatens people's dignity, work that's humiliating in some way.
For example, I was talking to some sewage workers in Chennai
for a while, and I was asking them about alcohol at the time.
And I was asking them, why do you drink as much as you do?
And they would say, well, our work is really humiliating
and it's really difficult to do.
There's horrible smells, and it's just really uncomfortable.
So they're essentially drinking during work
to make their work bearable, in some way.
So similarly, lots of low-income workers
with relatively low education would not
be able to do desk jobs or other types of jobs,
essentially, that require education,
therefore engage in hard physical labor,
and that's very painful.
And pain, again, is very bad for people's well-being.
Then there's no social status and exclusion.
If you're at the bottom of society
and compare yourself to others, that's
not good for your well-being.
There's also the idea of freedom in a sense
that freedom of being able to do whatever you want to do.
If you're poor, you have much fewer possibilities.
If you want to just move to some other place in the city,
it's not if you're poor, you can just say,
I'm going to move there and buy a house or rent an apartment.
If you're very poor, you might not be able to do that.
And then there are a bunch of other reasons
that were already mentioned.
There could also be some positive impacts, or at least
people hypothesized that.
The reason why I'm not going to focus on that
so much because the empirical relationship, as I'm
going to show you, is relatively clear that shows essentially,
being poor is bad for your well-being.
But that could be things like, maybe people
are less stressed by career ambitions
and all these other types of things that we just mentioned.
I'm not saying these things are not necessarily at play,
but empirically, it's the case that the negative effects
tend to largely outweigh the positive ones.