PROFESSOR: So now how do we think about these effects?
Or let me just summarize what we have found.
So first, one really important fact
that we didn't quite know about the lives of the poor
is that the urban poor at least--
we don't know quite know about the rural poor.
But at least the urban poor are severely sleep deprived.
They spend about five and a half hours per night
and have really low sleep efficiency.
So not only do they not get a lot of hours of quantity
of sleep, but the sleep is also extremely interrupted
all the time.
And so we should measure this a lot more
and try to understand better how that relates to poverty.
For example, there's some recent work
by Claire Duvernoy and Maulik Jagnani
that shows that when people receive cash transfers,
household heads, for example, have improved sleep quality.
That's to say people are worried about money.
And once you give them money or cash,
their sleep quality goes up, which
suggests that at least some of what this low sleep
efficiency comes from is from people are just worried
about stuff in their life.
And if you're able to reduce their worries in some ways,
you perhaps would increase people's sleep efficiency
and potentially their well-being in some ways.
Second, you can, in fact, increase people's sleep.
We only were able to increase people's sleep quantity,
not their sleep quality.
So one really important question is now,
can we improve sleep quality potentially?
And that's really an open question
that we need to study more.
Now next, we find new effects of increasing night
sleep on a range of outcomes.
We had some expert predictions.
We had some sleep experts, some economists
who were essentially trying to predict
the effects that we would find.
Lots of people, including ourselves,
predicted there to be large positive effects
both on productivity and labor supply and so on, and earnings.
And we can clearly reject that these predictions are correct.
That's to say experts seem to overestimate the effects
of sleep in our setting.
This is also a clear contrast to what
the medical literature says-- what I showed you earlier.
Now why is that?
I think there's two potential reasons.
One reason is, as I just said, it's
because of sleep quality is really low.
So just if you add sleep quantity
to a person that has really low sleep quality,
the benefits of that are just not very high.
And we have to test interventions
to increase sleep quality to find out
whether that's really true.
The other alternative is, perhaps,
the evidence that people find in sleep lab might just not
generalize as much as, perhaps, we would have thought.
We might find in a sleep lab, if you are fully sleep deprived,
you might really make bad decisions
or might be really bad at cognitive tasks, and so on.
But maybe that doesn't necessarily
generalize to real world settings.
My interpretation is mostly the former.
We think it's really because of the low sleep quality,
but I think we need further studies to try and find that
out.
Now second, we find, in fact, no evidence
that people under-invest in sleep in their settings.
I told you earlier, it seems to be, perhaps,
look, people sleep so little, is it
really people might be underinvesting in sleep?
Maybe they're making mistakes in sleeping as little as they do.
But now we put people to sleep more by encouraging to do so.
And essentially, nothing in their lives improves.
People earn less money.
People are not happier.
People are not more productive.
People are not more attentive and so on.
People are not nicer to others, et cetera.
So there's really nothing good that comes out of that,
at least over the course of about a month, that
sort of suggests that people are right in a sense
to sleep only five hours per night given the circumstances
that they're in.
That is to say we address a set of constraints or issues
that affect their sleep in their sleep environments.
And within those constraints, within those types of family
circumstances or living conditions that people are in,
making small marginal changes to people's sleep
doesn't really do very much.
We're spending more time in bed.
Doesn't really do very much.
So what they were doing before seems, in fact, perhaps,
the right thing to do.
Of course, it could well be that in the longer run,
or if you more dramatically change
people's sleep, if you moved everybody to a nice hotel,
for example, or a very nice apartment building, et cetera,
perhaps then people would become a lot more productive.
And we don't know whether that's true.
And I think one needs to figure out.
Of course, it could also be that over the very long run,
it's really bad for your health if you only
sleep four or five hours.
And we don't really measure that at all
because we only measure things over the course of a month.
And there's lots of medical studies that show, for example,
if you sleep deprive animals, they get cancer at some point,
or much more so than if you don't.
So there's lots of scary medical literature
that suggests the long run effects of sleep deprivation
are very severe, including for things like Alzheimer,
or cognitive decline, and so on.
But that's not things that we necessarily measure here.
But I think it's still true that in people's environments
from what they can observe, if you are sitting in Chennai
and thinking about should I sleep for an hour or more,
not if people do that or as we push people to experiment
with that, it doesn't seem like people should
be sleeping more, at least from what they
can observe in their lives.
And, again, that doesn't mean that there are no longer
effects potentially of not doing so,
but that's not something that's easy to measure
for us or for people in the study.
Now at the same time, naps seem to have important impacts.
So naps have important impact on a range of outcomes.
Naps improve productivity.
They improve attention.
They improve happiness.
So if you're an employer with your workers,
you might actually very seriously consider
allowing your workers to nap, perhaps.
Or if you are an MIT undergrad who's hired,
napping might be a good idea for you.
Preferably not in class.
Why are naps having effects compared to night sleep?
Or why is it that the effects are larger here?
Well, it could be that the quality of these naps
are much higher in the sense we have a very nice sleeping
conditions in our office where people can nap.
And so it might well be that they get higher quality sleep.
And higher quality sleep has high returns.
Of course, it's also true that naps are in the afternoon
and night sleep is at night.
And so we can't really necessarily say it's quality
as opposed to timing of sleep.
Yes?
STUDENT: Yeah, I'm a little confused
why mattresses and earplugs--
why don't they increase quality?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, great question.
So I don't think we know necessarily the answer to that.
I think I have two answers to that.
One is you see here all the issues that people report
interfere with their sleep.
This is sort of the fraction of participants
in any given night who say--
these people say they didn't sleep well.
We ask them, what interfered with your sleep?
And that's what people say.
Right?
And so what we are addressing is what you see here
in blue as opposed to in gray.
You see that there's lots of stuff that's unaddressed.
There's mosquitoes.
There's too many people in the same room, worries and stress,
physical pain, et cetera.
These are still really important barriers.
And it could be that people's sleep quality is really low,
for example, because they're in pain because there are
many people in the same room.
There's lots of mosquitoes.
And we just didn't address this concern,
and so people still wake up a lot.
Second, we provide people, for example,
with earplugs, eyeshades, and so on.
Take-up of these types of devices
is not particularly high.
So we tried various different things, just
seven types of earplugs that you can try,
and can exchange them if you like them,
and so on and so forth.
You can try different mattresses and so on.
We tried very hard to give them all sorts of options,
try to explain how to use earplugs, have them practice,
and so on and so forth.
But it turns out, I think, in particular earplugs,
people just don't like using earplugs.
And it's very hard to get used to them.
Could we have done better in that?
Perhaps, but we're not able to have high take-up on that.
So I think the combination of those two things
is to say we don't address all factors that
interfere with people's sleep.
And, two, even the factors that we try to address
are not fully addressed.
Seems to explain what's going on.
And that's not to say one can't do it,
but it's to say it's not an easy policy in the sense of if you
just gave people a bunch of earplugs, eyeshades,
and mattresses, you should not expect sleep efficiency
to go up.
Does that make sense?
STUDENT: So if we were to continue
trying different things, like mosquito nets,
trying to combat all these different factors,
does it mean that there's some combination of things
we can use that would eventually increase?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
We could try various things.
We could try also provide people with mosquito nets
or other types of mosquito repellent.
You could offer people different rooms
where they can sleep in better, or maybe separately
from others.
You could provide people with some form
of money or other ways to reduce people's worries.
There's some form of therapy that you can
do to reduce people's worries.
You could also reduce their physical pain,
for example, and so on.
And you could do a combination of those things.
My guess is there's at least some scope for improving
people's sleep quality.
In some sense, we know that that's true
because rich people sleep very well, say, in the US.
And I think also in India, but we don't necessarily
know that yet.
So in a way, we know that something is--
there's got to be some way to improve people's sleep
quality overall.
Now, of course, it could be that if you had certain life
experiences, et cetera that interfered with your sleep,
it's much more difficult to do so.
And so then you might say then, well,
why do we overall increase sleep?
I think there's a lot coming from the encouragement
and the incentives.
We tell people, look, you sleep five hours.
Doctors say you should be sleeping seven to nine hours
and so on and so forth.
We incentivize some people, so people spend more time
in bed, which is easy for them to control.
It seems like they sleep quality is much
harder to control for people.
Yeah, let me quickly finish up.
OK, so if you're an employer, you
might think offering naps might be a good idea.
And naps are often crowded out by Western work schedules,
which might be quite costly.
Napping might be a really beneficial thing for you to do.
Now there's lots of open questions.
And some of them are sort of questions
that Daniel was asking, which is, more broadly,
what are the effects of sleep in other settings,
in rich countries, in rural areas, in developing countries?
Short or long-run effects.
And particularly, the crucial question
really is how to improve sleep quality in developing
countries.
There's quite a bit of evidence that
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
works quite well in rich settings.
So essentially, there's a bunch of apps or types
of interventions that essentially do
some form of therapy for sleep.
So if you have lots of worries and issues
with sleeping at night, you might want to try this out.
There's quite a bit of evidence that
shows that at least on average, that works pretty well.
You might also perhaps think about lowering
people's financial strain.
There's a recent paper-- that's what I just mentioned--
cash transfers, in fact, are able to improve people's sleep
quality in some ways.
Studying naps, more natural sleep environments,
in particular in work environments, seems important.
One thing that has been studied a lot less in particular
in low income contexts is learning or education, test
scores, and so on on students.
There's some work on this.
In particular, there's one study recently by [INAUDIBLE] et al.
These are, I think, study students in Pittsburgh that
are incentivized to sleep more.
And, in fact, their test scores go up.
So throughout the semester, they receive
incentives to spend more time to sleep more.
And the authors find that that works in a sense
that students do sleep more.
They spend less time on social media, et cetera,
and their test scores at the end or their GPA
essentially goes up as a result of that.
Now that's in the US, of course.
We know much less about low income
contexts what might happen if people were to sleep more.
One reason why I might think that that's a good idea
or why that might be potentially a good thing to try
is kids in particular or young people
in general, but particular kids, are
much better at sleeping well.
Old people don't sleep well at all.
They wake up a lot.
If you think about your grandparents
and so on, they tend to not sleep very much,
get up early, and so on because they
have trouble sleeping well.
Kids instead can sleep really, really well.
And so therefore, a lot of the factors
that interfere with people's sleep that I just showed you
might perhaps be less important for kids.
They might just be able to sleep through all
the noise and all sorts of things that are happening.
So there then, if you're able to increase people's sleep
quantity, perhaps there might be higher returns for education,
learning, and so on and so forth.
But that's just speculation.
We don't know whether that's really true.
OK, let me just summarize in one minute
what I want you to take away.
So one is the myth of the happy poor
is a myth, as I just laid out to you.
Poverty is detrimental for well-being and mental health,
and that's been shown in abundance.
In particular, anti-poverty program
robustly improved well-being and mental health.
Conversely, negative shocks.
For example, if people lose their job
or if bad stuff happens to them, bad harvests and so on
are deteriorating people's well-being
and their mental health.
That's not to say that some of these forces
might not be at play.
Maybe there is, in fact, lower levels of stress
or social comparisons and so on in villages.
That might well be true.
But, really, what's dominating in terms
of the effects on people's well-being is that being poor
is bad for your mental health and for your well-being.
Now worries about money specifically,
and maybe perhaps mental distress more broadly,
can lower worker productivity, and therefore
make it even more difficult for people
to become richer or make money.
Further, poverty entails lots of other psychological burdens
beyond worries about money.
For example, poor sleep.
There's lots of things that haven't been studied.
So, A, we haven't studied how to increase sleep quality.
And perhaps, sleep is, in fact, also
important for affecting people's productivity, or learning,
or other types of things.
But there might be also many other things going on,
for example, physical pain or other types of things,
that might be really important in reinforcing poverty perhaps.
So we need much more work to uncover
these types of causal effects and some
of these underlying mechanisms to study
the relationship between poverty, well-being,
and mental health.

True or false? It is a foregone conclusion that the poor are less happy than the rich, so there is nothing to be gained from studying this topic.

Happiness is highly correlated with income — richer countries are happier; and as countries become richer, they also become happier. Therefore, a reasonable approach to increase happiness in poor countries might be to focus on improving income for the entire country.

True or false? The same is true of depression — richer countries are less depressed, so we should focus on improving poor countries’ incomes to reduce depression.


In the absense of psychological effects, economic theory would suggest that during Days 8–12 (the “Post-Pay Period”), compared to the control group, the productivity of the treatment group should be…



Higher because they are less stressed.

The same because the incentives are unchanged.

Lower because of the income effect.

Uncertain because they may not trust the researchers.