PROFESSOR: So now, what do we find?
So first we find that people spend quite a bit of money,
right after they receive the money, on loan repayments
and on household expenditures.
So people pay quite a bit of money to loans and credits
to pay back their loans that they have already.
That's a huge increase relative to the control group.
The control group pays about 94 rupees overall.
[? Back ?] in the treatment group
pays an additional 275 rupees back.
So people get about 1,400 rupees in payment.
They spend about 94 plus 75 on repayment.
So they pay quite a bit of money back.
They also spend quite a bit of money on stuff
like clothes, food, household expenditures,
household necessities.
So essentially what happens is, people get more money.
They use some of that money to pay back debt.
They use some of that money to pay for household expenditures.
And they have some of that money that
is just to have cash on hand to have it
in case any shocks happen to them going forward.
Does that make sense?
So next we asked people an open-ended question that I
already showed you before.
We asked on one day, what do you think about while working?
We have in the control group people
who say they're focused on the work task.
This is on a specific day.
And then we have people who did not think
about their financial worries.
It's sort of a double negative, in some sense.
So what we find is that people are
more likely to be focused on the work task.
So people are more likely to say, in the treatment group,
I've been thinking about work during the day.
And they're also more likely to not think
about their financial worries.
That's to say, they're less likely to think
about their financial worries.
So essentially what we find is that the cash infusion
increases people's focus on the work task,
and reduces their thoughts about finances.

So next we're going to look at do workers actually
become more productive?
And you can see this best perhaps here.
You see here, this is a baseline.
This is before the payments happen.
You see the two groups are the same.
You see here this is a treatment effects for lower
wealth and higher wealth.
And essentially you see the treatment effects
before the payment period are zero.
And then what you see is that people who have lower wealth
to start with in our experiment, they
become a lot more productive immediately after the payment.
So they receive the payment on day 8.
On day 9, they show up and they're
more productive in the morning.
And that higher productivity remains throughout the end
of the study.
So essentially, workers who have been paid
more, they have more cash on hand,
they become more productive over time.
Does that sense?
So how large is this effect?
It's about 6% to 13% increase in hourly productivity.
And the strongest effects among the poorest workers
in our sample, presumably because the cash infusion
is most meaningful for them.
If you're relatively rich in the sample,
and rather receive another 1,000 earlier or later,
it doesn't really matter so much.
But if you're quite poor, receiving 1,400 rupees
is a lot of money.
So people are much less worried about their finances,
and therefore become more productive at work.
Now, this is about overall productivity.
How much do you produce?
Now in addition, we look at how are
people producing their output?
I told you already how to make a leaf plate.
Essentially you have to form a circle.
There can be no holes or gaps.
Leaf plates must not be visible.
Each leaf is in a regular shape.
So it's easy to make mistakes, it's
easy to make a plate that's not round,
it's easy to go in the wrong direction, and so on.
And as I said, I did a lot of mistakes.
This is not my leaf plate, unfortunately.
And so now we can measure that in people's output.
We collected everybody's output and measured
how many stitches people make.
So if you use a lot of leaves--
look at this.
This takes something like 10 to 12 leaves.
It's a leaf plate, how it's supposed to look like.
My leaf plates would have something like 20 leaves,
because I had lots of holes.
You have to fix the hole.
And then you go in the wrong direction,
and it's way too big, and so on and so forth.
That, of course, takes you a lot more effort and time.
And you're only paid for completed leaf plates.
So if you're inattentive, you don't know what you're doing,
or you're distracted, you might use a lot more leaves
or stitches.
Or if you don't stitch it properly,
you have to stitch three times.
And so you have to undo mistakes and that takes you a lot more
time and effort for the same piece rate.
So [? have ?] these measures of attentiveness in production,
which is the number of double holes
where if you undo a stitch, or you stitch somewhere and then
undid the stitch.
The number of leaves, if you make lots of leaves,
the number of stitches are a measure
of quality of production-- how attentive are you
while producing.
When you look at that, we find, similar to what I showed you
before, that being paid increases not only people's
overall production, but also the measures of attentiveness.
So people become not only faster at working and producing more,
their attentiveness of work also goes up.
I should have told you here, we are measuring these outcomes
unbeknownst to workers.
So we essentially just collect the output
and then measure and rate the quality of the output.
So it's not that workers know necessarily
that we're going to measure this and try to improve that.
Instead, it seems to be that subconsciously workers don't
seem to necessarily notice that they're
producing higher quality.
It's just once your mental burden is reduced,
people produce better quality, higher attentive work.

I showed you this already.
This is essentially consistent with several psychological
mechanisms, such as worry, stress, sadness, and so on.
We think that worries is quite important, because I showed you
some evidence that people seem to actually report
they worry less, they think less about money.
But it could also be other things like stress and sadness
that we don't necessarily measure.
These attentiveness effects persist
until the end of the contract.
Let me mostly skip this.
We don't think it's about things like fairness concerns.
You think you're paid earlier than somebody else,
and maybe the other person is really mad at the employer.
Or the employer, because we pay them later,
and therefore they didn't work very well.
We spent quite a bit of time trying to figure out,
or trying to address these concerns.
We don't think it's about the relationship
between the employer and the worker,
but rather we think that workers just
reduce their mental burdens.
And once mental burdens are reduced,
workers become more productive.
We also don't think it's about nutrition.
Remember I showed you that once people receive more money,
they actually spend that money on nutrition, at least
in part, on food.

In the short-run, for example, we
didn't find any differences in people's breakfast consumption.
So people are essentially pretty much eat
the same breakfast every day.
There doesn't seem to be any difference between treatment
and control.
We also don't find any differences
in the morning versus the afternoon throughout
the workday.
So we don't think nutrition is the main thing that's
going on here.
So let me briefly conclude this study.
And then we're going to take a break
to talk about sleep before everybody falls asleep
until I get there.
So what do we find, or what have I shown you here?
So being able to pay expenses at home-- so people get money,
they have more money now available--
boosts workers' productivity and attentiveness at work.
That's to say that financial strain
itself might be detrimental for productivity and earning.
That's to say when you look at times when workers might need
money the most, when you have a financial shock
or when you're not doing well financially,
or perhaps when somebody gets laid off,
they really want to be productive in making
more money somehow.
But precisely at that time when people need the money the most,
financial strain hurts worker productivity.
Notice this is not a policy evaluation.
We're not really advocating for a policy of paying people
weekly, or daily, or whatever.
This is just to say it's a proof of concept
that productivity effects occur in high stakes setting that
affect people's labor income.
That's to say this is a setting where workers' income crucially
depends on how productive they are.
And when you relax people's, reduce
people's financial concern, they do become more productive.
Now, what are the implications of that?
Well, one is, when you think about social programs,
often there's this myth or this concern
about if you give people money who are poor,
are they just going to stop working, or working less?
There is some evidence that, in fact, in Abhijit and others
have some papers on showing that that's not the case-- at least
in low income contexts.
And, in fact, we find there might
be even some benefits of people are
able to produce more and more productive, potentially,
once they have more money.
So in fact, not only might there be
not a lot of important negative effects on labor supply,
in fact, people's productivity might go up.
Second, firms might want to support
workers' financial well-being.
You might say a firm might want to just provide
people with insurance, or savings programs,
or other types of programs where they essentially can improve
their financial well-being.
And that might be good, not just because the firm
might care about their workers in some ways.
But, in fact, it might make the workers more productive
directly.
Again, notice our study is not an evaluation
of an optimal pay frequency.
The reason being that the control group receives money
at the end, and then we stop the study.
But maybe on the day after, the control group
would have been more productive, because now they
receive a bunch of cash and the treatment group already
spent that.
But I think what one can take away
from this is that there are at least potential productivity
effects of programs that support workers' financial well-being.
Let me see, were there any questions on this?
Yeah?
STUDENT: mentioned it in your comment earlier,
but I was just curious to know whether anyone
has looked at how aware people are
of these effects on themselves.
Just for example, you mentioned it with the [INAUDIBLE]..
And it seems to be they intuitively work better.
But if one asked them at the end do
you feel better, or do you feel like you work better,
are you more--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, we have not asked that question directly.
We have one piece of evidence, which is the following.
We have a separate small experiment
where we changed the piece rate of how much people
are paid per plate.
So sometimes we doubled the piece rate.
You just get twice as much per plate that you produce,
and sometimes not.
And we look at the effects on people and holding
constant their overall payments.
And we look at the impact of that on productivity
and on attention.
So if you thought people are quite aware of this
and say that they can control their attention in some ways
and say attention is the way to become more productive,
you would think that if I pay you twice as much,
now you're going to become more attentive.
You're going to also put in more effort,
and then try to produce more.
That's not what we find.
We find some effects of increased productivity.
So people become a little bit more productive, but actually
not very much.
And attentiveness, or the measures
we have of attentiveness, don't change at all.
That sort of suggests that attentiveness is not really
under workers' control.
In the sense that it's not really that you can say
I want to be more attentive, and then increase my productivity
in some ways.
But instead, it seems to be that the effects that we find
relax people's financial concerns.
And then they feel better.
They become more attentive almost automatically,
if you want.
Now, you're asking something slightly different.
Which is about, if you ask people, would they say,
well, I felt a lot better and somehow it was easier to work.
STUDENT: If you tell them you work much better,
what do you think it is?
Could they pinpoint, I think--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's a great question.
So that's not something economists
do that much in studies, but I think they should do it more.
We haven't asked these questions,
in part because we had rolling enrollment.
Meaning we had 30 people in the study at a time,
and another 30, another 30, and so on.
So you want to minimize spillovers
to other participants later.
That's not to say we couldn't have
come back later and done that, but we don't have any of that.
But I think it's a great question.
Actually, now that I think of it,
there's another study by Josh Dean, a former student of mine,
who looks at the effects of noise on productivity--
so noise pollution.
And what he finds is that there's
reasonably large effects of being exposed to noise--
louder places compared to less loud places--
on productivity.
So workers are more productive, they're
also more attentive in terms of measures of cognition
when they are working quiet compared
to when they work under noise.
But then you ask them what their willingness to pay
is to work under quiet versus noisy condition,
and their willingness to pay essentially
is close to zero for that.
Which sort of suggests that there
are some issues about comprehension
of these types of questions.
But that at least suggests that workers are not
necessarily aware of that noise affects how productive they are
in the setting, even though if they were more productive
they would earn a lot more money.