PROFESSOR: So now these are all correlations.
OK, I'm showing you essentially people's correlation
between people's income and their well-being in some ways.
Now, what about causal effects?
Now, of course, and you have seen all this already,
there's a bunch of causal evidence coming from RCTs,
essentially from cash transfer programs.
And you have seen the give directly
studies several times throughout the class.
If you sort of look at it, it turns out
there's many, many cash transfer RCTs.
Some of them are--
many of them are unconditional cash transfers, where
the government or an NGO or place just says, here's money.
You can do with it whatever you want.
And there's no strings attached at all.
That's what the give directly RCT is.
But then there's also a bunch of other studies
that are conditional cash transfers,
things like if your kid goes to school,
you get money for example, or things like that.
I think these are mostly unconditional cash transfers.
What essentially you find is that there's
very robust evidence on short-run improvements
in well-being.
So here, you see years since the cash transfer began.
And you essentially see a treatment effect
as in standard deviations of subjective well-being,
as well as mental health outcomes.
And essentially, you see that people are--
generally, these dots, these are--
each dot is like one estimate from one study.
What essentially you see that these dots are generally
above zero, it's about 0.1 standard deviation effect.
So essentially, giving people money makes them happier.
There's some evidence you can sort of
see this is sort of downward sloping in some ways.
There's some evidence that these effects
sort of attenuate over time.
So if you give people some money and come back
the next day, or next month, or next year,
people are going to be a lot happier than before.
But if you come back five years later, some of these effects
are less pronounced than before.
And then there's some evidence that larger transfers
make people happier as perhaps you might expect.
Similarly, there's also some evidence, for example,
and I think--
I forgot who was talking about stress.
That, for example, cortisol levels
are lower among people who received cash transfers
compared to people who did not.
And that's some measure at least of people
are less stressed than before, which again,
is like a measure of well-being.
Does this make sense?
OK, now, so this is about causal effects of money or poverty
on people's well-being.
Now, in particular, when it comes to mental distress
or anxiety and depression, there might
be effects in both directions.
So poverty might affect people's anxiety and depression.
But at the same time, there might be effects feeding back
in the other direction.
So we talked about how might poverty worsen mental health.
We talked about most of these already.
People might be a lot more worried, and anxious,
and so on.
They might have low physical health.
They might not be able to leave their house.
They might just not be able--
might just not do well in terms of being
able to walk and so on.
We talked not so much about this,
but there's also early life conditions.
For example, if you're very poor growing up,
there's some evidence that leads to symptoms
of depression and anxiety later in life among people.
Exposure to violence and crime is higher among the poor.
Social status is lower, and so on.
So there's lots of reasons why poverty
might be bad for people's mental health among these.
We already talked about that quite a bit.
And then but on the other hand, there
might be also effects in the other direction.
Mental distress can have lots of economic consequences.
We're going to talk a little bit about-- not about depression
and anxiety, but more worries about money
and the effects of worries about money on productivity.
You might also think people's beliefs
about what they can achieve might be different.
You might think that people might
make very different decisions.
Women are disproportionately affected
by depression and anxiety.
So depression and anxiety might also disproportionately affect
women, and therefore, female empowerment.
You might also think that if parents are depressed,
that's bad for investment in children,
and human capital, education, and so on.
So there's lots of reasons to believe that there's
an effect in both direction from poverty to mental health
and from mental health back to poverty.

And this effect might potentially
reinforce each other.
Any questions?
OK, so then, what evidence do we actually have?
And this is similar to what I just showed you before.
So I showed you here, these are essentially
cash transfer programs.
This is like a mixture of subjective well-being
and mental health.
Here, I'm showing you mostly mental health outcomes.
And what you see essentially, this
is sort of a plot that's sort of a meta-analysis,
as people call it, which is a plot that
shows treatment effect across a lot of different studies.
And broadly, what you see essentially
is that both multifaceted anti-poverty programs,
it's essentially the ultra poor program with similar types
of program, have positive effects
on people's mental health.
Similarly, cash transfer programs
have positive effects on people's mental health.
The effects are about something like 0.1 standard deviations.
So essentially, giving people money or supporting them
in some ways improves their mental health,
be that through cash or ultra poor programs.
Yes?
STUDENT: Are there studies the other way?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so I'm going to show you this.
That's coming next.
So that's more like--
so I sort of characterize this direction here
is very robust in the sense that you say, if people are poor,
A in the cross section, you'll find
they have more depression, anxiety, et cetera.
And then reducing poverty or anti-poverty programs
improve people's mental health.
We don't know exactly what the channels are necessarily.
For example, there's some evidence of, say,
providing people in the US, in fact,
a colleague, Amy Finkelstein, has a paper
with coauthors on the Oregon Health Insurance
essentially where randomly people were given health
insurance and others were not.
And that also led to lower levels of depression.
Which is to say maybe here people's worries or anxiety
about uncertainty in their lives was reduced.
And therefore, people are less depressed.
So there's quite a bit of evidence
of the overall effects.
Essentially just if you do economic interventions that
improves people's well-being, we don't necessarily
know exactly why and how or what's
the most effective way of doing that.
Now, what about the other direction?
So here, we have quite a bit of evidence
that in particular, non-specialist therapy
works quite well.
What I mean by non-specialist therapy, so we know quite--
there's quite a bit of evidence that
cognitive behavioral therapy, essentially just talk therapy,
is highly effective in reducing people's depression
and anxiety.
So if you go to a therapist for a full session of CBT,
which cognitive behavioral therapy, which
would be something like 10 to 12 sessions,
that has, on average, pretty large and beneficial effects
on people's depression.
So just getting therapy improves people's mental health.
Now, one issue in low income contexts
is that trained therapists are often not available at scale.
That's to say you find much fewer qualified people to treat
people's depression directly.
And so what instead has been developed,
and this is our coauthor--
Vikram Patel and coauthors have done
what's called the Healthy Activity Program, which
essentially is a non-specialist therapy where
people in the village, like community health workers,
but also other peers in the village
are trained for like a couple of months
to essentially deliver sort of simplified forms of therapy
that are extremely inexpensive.
They cost something like $70 per person.
And you find there's clear effects on depression.
This is a year later, there's clear reductions
in people's depression.
This is depression symptoms in the treatment
group versus the control group.
And there's also some evidence on days
unable to work or things like healthcare costs.
So people are able to work, or report at least that they
work more days.
They also report that they have lower health costs.
Now, that's not quite the same as lower poverty.
So this is some survey questions that say, well, people
are able to work more.
These tend to be sort of public health studies.
There's a very active literature that now tries to look at--
now, if you provide people with other forms of therapy,
are they, in fact--
can we find some economic benefits of that?
There's some evidence here on-- in particular,
on female empowerment and childhood development.
So there are some studies that show
that if you treat depression among pregnant women, six,
seven years later, A, these women are still less depressed
compared to the control group.
B, they have higher levels of female empowerment.
So they make more decisions in the household.
And C, there's higher levels of investment in human capital
among children.
Children go to better schools.
They have better tools for homework and so on.
Presumably, because women have more decision
making power in the household.
And they tend to allocate more resources to their children
compared to men.
So there's some evidence that shows that.
There's less evidence directly on the effect
of therapy on say, productivity on labor supply, and so on.
There's some of evidence on labor supply.
But I think the verdict is still out on that.

OK, so here, so what the authors argue here is to say, well,
people have worked more days.
And they also have reduced their healthcare costs.
So in fact, given that the intervention is quite cheap,
it's essentially pays for itself within a few months.
Now, we have some work looking at the long-lasting effects.
Here, essentially, what you see is
that this is the fraction depressed in the treatment
or control group.
What you see is-- this is what I showed you before,
there's large differences between treatment and control
at something like three months, also at 12 months.
And these effects tend to persist for a long, long time.
So five years later, if you go to people,
which is what we did in Goa in India, if you go back
to people five years later, you still
find lower levels of depression in the treatment group
compared to the control group.
And now, if you look at this area between the two groups,
this is the number of months of depression averted
in treatment versus control.
And you find essentially this is highly cost effective
in the sense that it costs about $7
per month of depression averted, which is-- depression
is very, very severe in terms of affecting people's well-being.
So if it costs $7 to avert that for a month,
that's a pretty amazing sort of investment opportunity.

Let me stop here for a second and sort of summarize.
So what I've been showing you so far
is that the poor report lower subjective well-being
and happiness compared to the rich.
This correlation reflects causal effect.
In particular, anti-poverty programs
increase subjective well-being and mental health.
Therapy, on the other hand, has long-lasting mental health
benefits.
There is also some evidence at least of economic benefits.
I think there's more work to be done
to figure out what exactly these benefits are
and how lasting they are.
We're going to next look at is whether worries about money
lower worker productivity.
So far, what I showed you here and summarized what we just
discussed is more about anxiety and depression, which are
sort of more severe conditions.
Worries about money is essentially
every person-- or almost every person
who is relatively poor will have worries about money
at least at some point in time.
We're going to now look at are these worries about money,
do they have causal effects on people's productivity.