PROFESSOR: So this is joint work with a [INAUDIBLE]..
This is a study in rural India, where
we try to look at are these financial concerns--
is worrying about money, does this
get in the way of being productive at work?
And so what we consider here is financial strain,
we call it, which is periods of cash shortfalls.
So as you already learned a lot about in class
is that being poor doesn't just mean that the levels of income
are low, but it also means often there's
a lot of variance and lots of shocks.
There's lots of unexpected shocks,
which is, say, health shocks or the harvest is bad and so on.
But there's also a lot of predictable cycles.
This is the end of the month, so before harvest,
which is, essentially, say, when people run out of money
at the end of the month, so the end of a harvest cycle.
So when you harvest as a farmer, in particular
when you have cash crops, after the harvest,
you get a bunch of cash from selling your crops.
And then you have to use that money for about a year
or even longer to live on.
So at the end of this harvest cycle before the next harvest,
people are going to be relatively poor.
At the beginning of the harvest cycle
or after the harvest has actually been done,
people tend to be relatively rich.
And so we know that essentially there's
predictable changes in financial strain, both
for unexpected shocks, but also for expected variation.
So for example, if you look in the US
at people who are on food stamps,
you will see that they eat a lot more calories at the beginning
of the month compared to the end of the month
because they run out of money at the end of the month.
That's also true if you look at farmers.
At the beginning of the harvest season,
once they have just harvested, they're relatively rich.
At the end of it, they're relatively poor.

Then this financial strain entails mental costs, even when
expected income is coming.
So for example, if you look in the US,
the fraction who feels financially insecure
drops by 53% at the beginning of the month.
So these are people who often--
they know exactly at the beginning of the month,
they're going to get either food stamps or other types
of benefits.
They know that's going to happen,
yet once they receive the money, their financial insecurity
falls by quite a lot.
And so if you have been--
I think today is the last of the month.
So if you receive some regular money from somewhere,
you might be able to sympathize in the sense
that once you receive money, once money is in your bank
account, you feel a lot better than
before because now you can spend it.
You're flush with money and relatively rich compared
to the day before or days before when you're relatively poor.
In India in our setting, about 86% of people in our sample
feel worried about their finances
in the annual lean season.
What's the lean season?
The lean season is when people essentially
don't have much to do because essentially people have already
planted.
And now, they're sort of waiting for the harvest.
And there's just not much to do.
So there's not much agricultural work.
But there's also not much other jobs that you could do.
And so now, there's a literature that
looks at the cognitive consequences of poverty
and financial strain.
There's some papers that show impacts
on lab measures of cognition.
That's to say if you look at people before harvest
compared to after harvest, there's
some evidence that shows that people essentially
have higher levels of cognition before harvest
compared to after harvest.
Now, what we're going to try and ask
is whether these forces have economically important effect.
Is it, in fact, the case that if we reduce
people's financial strain, would workers become more productive?
And so what we're going to try and look at
is in particular worker productivity.
Why do we look at worker productivity?
Well, because labor income is sort of
depends crucially on worker productivity.
If you work somewhere, if you're more productive,
you're going to earn more money and particularly in places
when you're paid piece rates.
So we're going to look at whether relieving people's
financial stress makes a person more productive at work.
This is a field experiment with 408 manufacturing workers
in rural India.
What we're going to do is to alleviate financial constraints
in an experiment, we're going to vary the timing of income
and then look at productivity, as well as some measures
of people's attention.
So we're going to look at is attention really something that
changes as people are working?
Now, how do we do that?
We have a sample of workers in rural [INAUDIBLE]..
They are in the lean season, meaning
they have very little work to do in agriculture, but also
in manufacturing.
They have something like seven, eight days
of work in the past month.
And they get these intermittent short term contract jobs.
They're paid about $3 or $4 per day.
That's often people's family income.
Now, what is the work task?
The work task is to make these disposable plates
for restaurants that look something like this.
I also try to do these myself.
My plates did not look like this.
So what do you have to do is you have to use these leaves.
And you see these small sticks here made out of wood,
and you have to sort of stitch them together
into round plates.
These are used in restaurants for curries
or other types of things.
So you really don't want to have any holes in your leaf plates.
And so the leaf plates have to be round.
They have to be a certain size.
And they also can't have any holes as well.
And so that's kind of a relatively attention heavy task
that we chose, in part because we're interested in if people
are really distracted because they worry about money,
are they now doing worse at this job?
People are incentivized to get a piece rate per production.
What does this mean?
Essentially, it means the more of these leaf plates
you make complete that are sort of satisfying quality
standards, the more money you earn.
This is we hire people for two weeks.
And during those two weeks, essentially,
the experiment or the work at our experimental site
is people's primary source of income at the time
and the bulk of their monthly earning.
They don't have much other work to do.
And so now they get this job.
That's a good job for them for two weeks.
And they don't have much else to do.
So people are highly motivated.
Stakes are pretty high.
People want to be productive.
Now, you might say, well, are people
really worried about money?
When you ask people about do you have outstanding loans,
lots of people have outstanding loans.
If you ask people can you come up
with about 1,000 rupees for an emergency quickly,
most people say it's very hard for them to do so.
1,000 rupees is about, I think at the time, maybe something
like $15 or the like.
So people really are very cash constrained.
They have lots of loans.
And they also are not really able to deal with shocks
easily.
When you ask them, well, what are you worried about?
They say, well, I worry about daily expenses,
about loans, health issues.
Sometimes marriage of daughters in particular
comes up because it's very expensive, but also
debt and other types of expenses that people
are concerned about.
Now, people, when you ask them, how worried are you,
lots of people say they're really worried.
About 70% say they're very worried about money.
And importantly, people also seem
to bring these worries with them to work.
So if you ask them on a randomly-- on one day,
we essentially ask people at the end of the workday, what
did you think about doing work, about 70%
say they thought about the work task, which is good.
That's what you're supposed to do.
But about 50%, In fact, say they worry about their finances
here.
And that's a pretty high number, considering that they're not
really-- it's not like thinking about work, about your finances
at work, helps you doing the work you're doing, if anything,
of course, it distracts you.
So now what we're going to do is we're
going to vary the timing of when workers receive
their expected wage payments.
So we're going to have some workers who
receive a cash infusion of liquidity and others have not.
Notice that we're not changing any incentives to work.
So people's overall wealth is going
to stay the same, as well as their piece rate
incentives that they receive.
Now, you might say, well, why should this do anything,
despite-- everybody knows that they're going to be paid.
Everybody is going to pay overall roughly the same.
So why should this make a difference?
Well, people can pay for urgent expenses.
They can reduced order debt that they have.
They also might feel less vulnerable to shocks
and the like.
They might just have a bunch of money in their pocket,
and they might feel richer because of that.
So here's what the experiment looks like.
There's a treatment group and the control group,
treatment group down here, control group up there.
Everybody works for 12 days, consecutive days
in the experiment.
Everybody is paid on day one because we
wanted to have a first payment to get people to essentially
trust us and think this is the work
site that actually pays people.
The control group is then paid on day 12
for all of their remaining work that they have done.
The treatment group instead is paid on day eight
for their work until then.
They are paid essentially for their work on day two
to day seven.
They're paid on day eight.
So they're getting a bunch of cash.
Now, that's quite a bit of cash because remember,
people don't have a lot of work anyway.
And that's a pretty well paid job.
So the treatment group gets a bunch of cash here.
And now what we can do is we can look
at what we call the post-pay period,
we can look at the treatment group versus the control group.
Treatment group has been paid a lot.
Control group has not been paid a lot.
And we can look at people's productivity.
Notice that we can also look at at the beginning of the study,
everybody is exactly the same.
We only tell people on day five whether you're paid
on day eight versus on day 12.
And so now we can look at, we can compare people
before the payment period, before in the first few days.
This is a randomized control trial.
We can look for are these two groups the same?
And they should be the same because on average
because we randomized.
Then we can measure announcement effect.
When I announce you that you're going
to be paid earlier than expected,
are you going to be more productive?
And then crucially, are we going to look
at the post-payment period, when we look at
are people more productive now they have more cash in hand?