
PROFESSOR: So let me continue.
Now, you might say, and we talked about this a little bit
already, that one psychological effect of poverty
is worries about money, as well as anxiety and depression.
But there's lots of other things potentially going on.
There's sleep deprivation.
People might worry a lot about money and therefore--
or other things in their lives-- and therefore might not
be able to sleep, as well as their sleeping conditions might
just be very adverse.
People might be quite stressed.
We talked about physical pain a bit
already, noise, environmental pollution, heat, stigma,
social exclusion, dignity, substance abuse,
mental distress, self esteem, et cetera.
There might be lots of other things, other ways
other than worries about money in which-- that
might have call them psychological effects
in some ways.
I think of this as effects that might make it difficult
for you to concentrate or to pay attention and so on.
One of the things that we have studied recently in India
is sleep deprivation.
This is a paper with Pedro Bessone and Gautam Rao, Heather
Schofield, and Mattie Toma.
Now, so what do we actually know about the effects of sleep?
So sleep-- we spend a lot of time sleeping,
MIT undergrads less so.
But, in general, people spend a lot
of time sleeping in their lives.
Expert-- and this is perhaps important for you to know.
Experts recommend 7 to 9 hours of sleep per night.
Any of you get 7 to 9 hours of sleep currently?
Oh, more than I would have thought.
I guess it's not finals season yet.
So about a third of US adults report sleeping
six or fewer hours per night.
And so there's lots of lab experiments
and observational studies that show impacts of sleep
on-- or sleep deprivation on cognition, health, happiness,
a little bit on wages, a little bit on decision making,
some work on test scores.
For example, if you look at-- and this is,
I think, mostly on high schools.
If you change, for example, the start time
in a high school from 7:00 AM to 8:00 AM,
test scores tend to go up, the reason being
that people go to bed at a fixed time, usually.
And if school starts at 8:00 instead of at 7:00,
kids essentially get more sleep.
If kids get more sleep, they do better in school.
Nearly all of this evidence is from rich countries.
A lot of it is also lab experimental evidence.
What does this mean?
This is like a sleep lab where you--
in a sleep laboratory where you go inside, you're wired,
you spend three, four days in the actual sleep lab.
Your brain is wired in various ways.
You sleep in the sleep lab for several days.
There's often a treatment group and a control group.
Treatment group sleeps very few hours-- sometimes
doesn't sleep at all.
Control group sleeps as usual, or at least as usual
as you can sleep in a sleep lab.
And then, usually, people look at effects
on cognitions and the like.
There's very little field evidence,
in the sense of evidence of long-run interventions
where people sleep in their own homes.
And now if you look at-- if you read books about sleep,
for example, Matthew Walker's book on why we sleep,
you get the impression that, if we just slept a little more,
the world would be a much better place.
Health care burden would plummet.
Mental health would get better.
Businesses would be more productive.
People would be healthier.
Roads would be safer.
Children would be smarter.
Everything would be great.
And so there's very much this notion
that people under-invest in sleep.
And if we could just get people to sleep more,
that would be great.
Notice that that's all based on evidence from rich countries.
That may or may not be true.
I'm going to show you some evidence from India that's
potentially quite different.
But when you read the evidence from rich countries,
you get the impression that sleep is really important
and there's a sleep deprivation epidemic, If you want.
And if we could only get people to sleep more,
things would get a lot better.
Now, one thing that becomes very apparent
if you look at websites such as Gapminder or Dollar
Street, which I think you remember from, I think, case 1
or from one of the first lectures--
when you look at people's conditions,
and I encourage you to actually do
that-- if you look at people's homes,
in particular, sleeping conditions, the beds and so on,
you see hugely different environments
of people's places.
You see, essentially-- this is here the Howard family
in Colorado earning--
this is, I think, family income about $4,650 per month.
So I think this is four or five people.
They have really nice curtains, really nice mattress,
pillows, plush, and so on.
And it seems very comfortable.
And one would be very tempted to take a nap right now,
especially at 2:00 PM in the afternoon.
Instead, you see here the Shah family,
which usually is people's living room as well as their bedroom,
where many people sleep in the same room.
People sleep on the floor.
There's dust, noise, mosquitoes-- many different
sort of factors that interfere with people's sleep.
So people's sleeping conditions are
dramatically different among the rich compared to the poor.
And that raises two key questions.
One question is-- well, now, A, do people actually just sleep
less and worse in some ways?
So is sleep among the poor worse compared
to sleep among the rich?
And, two, if we could increase people's sleep in some ways,
would that have returns or important effects
on people's lives?
And, in particular, you might say,
well, Matthew Walker would say, well, increasing sleep
for anybody is just amazing.
Now, it might be that that's true for the US.
But perhaps it's not the case if your sleep environment
looks like this.
If your sleep is really disrupted and so on,
perhaps then increasing your sleep
might actually not have very high returns.
And this is what we were trying to do.
We're trying to do three things.
We're trying to, first, objectively
measure people's sleep quantity and quality in Chennai.
This is a city in India.
Then we wanted to look at interventions
to increase people's sleep, as well as measure
the impact of these interventions,
then, on people's outcomes.
So what we were doing is we--
first, we tried to document people's sleep deprivation
and find alarmingly low quality of sleep.
What does this look like?
So you might have an Apple Watch or other types of Fitbits
or the like that essentially track your sleep over time.
So the way this works is-- essentially,
you have some wristband type of watch
that measures sleep through your motion.
And what you get is some pictures
that look something like this where you see-- this
is your entire time in bed.
This person went to bed at something like 11:00 PM,
got up at something like 7:00 or 8:00 AM.
So it wasn't bad, in this case--
I guess seven hours and 53 minutes.
You see in gray people's sleep time.
This is the time asleep.
Any minutes in gray are minutes where the person--
the sleep watch thinks that you're asleep.
And in red you see awake times.
This is-- if you have an Apple Watch or the like,
this is what your sleep might look like in the US,
something like--
and then there's a measure here--
what's called sleep efficiency.
This is the fraction of time that somebody spends in bed
that they're actually asleep.
Were we actually sleeping, as opposed to being in bed awake?
Often, there's some sleep latency period here.
When people go to bed at first, of course
they don't fall asleep immediately.
But once they're actually trying to sleep,
people still wake up sometimes.
Often, they wake up for a little bit.
Sometimes they don't even necessarily
notice or remember that.
Sometimes people get up and use the bathroom or so.
But this is a typical night for a typical person,
say in the US.
This is, in fact, a very unusually good night
in our sample.
This is about the 99th percentile.
So this is-- the top sleeper in our study sleeps like this.
But this is-- for comparison, this
is what your night's sleep roughly
might look like if you're a good sleeper.
Notice this person has nine awakenings.
And the longest sleep episode, uninterrupted sleep episode,
is 202 minutes.
Now, the typical night in Chennai among participants
looks something like this.
So here you see this person also spent about seven hours, 45
minutes in bed.
This is one particular person for one particular night.
And you see, essentially, the night
is riddled with awakenings.
The person wakes up all the time.
The longest-- so there's 31 awakenings
of at least one minute, so 31 different bars here.
Red bar is-- the longest uninterrupted sleep episode
is about 45 minutes.
That's about here.
Compare that to this type of person, who gets about--
some sleep streaks of about at least three hours overall.
Given that we think one sleep cycle takes something
like, I think, 90 to 120 minutes,
this person has essentially no uninterrupted sleep cycle
at all.
In particular, the person also unlikely--
we are not very good at measuring sleep quality,
but quite likely this person also
doesn't get a lot of deep sleep, just because this person wakes
up a lot.
So here's 31 awakenings, lots of awakenings.
Particularly, sleep efficiency is about 69%.
That's way, way lower than what you would find in the US.
In the US, you would find something
like sleep efficiency of 90% is normal.
Anything below 85%-- if you went to a sleep doctor,
that person would tell you you have a sleeping problem.
We need to fix it somehow.
This here is the typical person in a typical night in Chennai.
Now, what are these people?
Who are these people that are in our sample?
These are essentially lower middle class participants
that we hired for an office job to work on a data entry job
for about a month.
So these are not the poorest of the poor.
These are not people who sleep on the street.
These are people who are relatively poor.
They have reasonably good levels of education.
But they live in relatively poor living arrangements,
often with four or five people in the same room, and so on.
Here's another way to put this.
So the actigraph-- this is the measure--
that's the sleep watch that measures people's sleep.
You see here, essentially, sleep time--
these are hours per night.
When you ask people's self-report--
when you just ask them how many hours did you sleep,
people would say something like seven, 7.2 hours in our study.
This is, in fact, quite similar to what you would find
in the US or in India overall.
But that's self-reported.
That's what people say.
Now, notice that when you ask people how much did you sleep,
people often don't remember how often they woke up.
And often they confuse time in bed and time asleep.
Really, what we're interested in is time asleep,
not how much time did you spend in bed.
So when you look at the objectively measured sleep,
this is now using the actigraphs.
This is the fraction of people in our sample.
Objectively measured sleep is about 5.6 hours.
So the average person sleeps about 5 and a half hours
per night.
There's lots of people here who sleep like four hours, five
hours, and so on.
Notice this is a weekly average for people in our sample.
So that means, essentially, they have some nights
that are even worse than that.
But, on average, they sleep something like four,
five hours overall.
And that's very little.
Sleep expert would say you should sleep something
like seven to nine hours.
Now, what's preventing people from sleeping well?
We have three categories of reasons.
One is environmental conditions--
mosquitoes, noise, heat, cold, light, bathroom usage,
you have somebody else in the room,
uncomfortable condition, and so on.
Then there's mental distress, worries, insomnia, bad dreams,
and so on, as well as physical distress, physical pain,
disease hunger, thirst, and so on.
There's lots of reasons here.
Now, what we were-- in our study we tried to do the following.
We tried to essentially provide people
with ways to improve their environmental conditions.
In particular, we gave them mattress, earplugs, eye shades,
table fan, blanket, and pillow to try and see-- can we
make people's environmental sleep conditions better
that help them sleep better at night.
So we provided-- so we had-- so we have a sample of people,
about 500 people, whom we recruited for a month
to work for us in data entry.
And then we have different treatment group.
There's a control group who gets no intervention.
There are some night sleep treatment groups
where people get either information that say, look,
sleep is important for you.
Doctors say you should be sleeping more.
They get these devices, as I said,
mattress, earplugs, eye shades, table fan, and so on,
as well as-- some people also get some incentives
to sleep more.
We say, if you sleep more hours, as measured by your watch,
then we're going to pay you some money to do so.