FRANK SCHILBACH: Welcome to 1473.
This is the Challenge of World Poverty lecture number 1,
so if you're here for 1473, you're at the right place.
My name is Frank Schilbach and Esther
Duflo-- she's over there-- and I will be teaching this class.
We've been teaching this class for many years.
It's a lot of fun, and we hope to have a lot of fun
this semester as well.
OK.
Having said that, welcome again to 1473.
Let me just tell you what the plan is for today.
We're going to have first introductions.
We're going to tell you what this class is about overall.
We're going to tell you about the magnitude of the problem.
What is global poverty?
What do we mean by this?
And why is it an important issue?
We're going to tell you a little bit about progress.
We're going to tell you about a big problem,
but also there will be some progress to report.
And then more specifically, we're
going to tell you about one specific example of one
specific person--
Abu is his name-- who lives in Bangladesh,
to make the point that poverty is much
more than aggregate statistics.
It's about people's lives and individuals.
And we're going to learn a little bit
about the life of Abu then.
And then we're going to talk a little bit about admin
and logistics at the very end, where we're
going to tell you all sorts of important details
if you want to take the class.
OK.
So first, who are we?
First, we have Esther Duflo, who really
doesn't need any introduction.
I'll let you introduce herself anyway.
ESTHER DUFLO: Hi.
I am Esther Duflo.
I was a graduate student here, a PhD student in this department,
and I've been teaching here ever since.
And I've devoted my career and my life
to try to understand the lives of the poor
in developing countries with the objective develop--
to help developing countries think
about policies and programs that can make their lives better,
and we are going to see hopefully
a lot of that in the class.
And it's a pleasure to have you here.
FRANK SCHILBACH: Thank you.
And as I told you already, I'm Frank Schilbach.
I'm from Germany.
I'm an economist at MIT as well.
I teach development economics, which
is what this class is about, as well as behavioral economics,
which is about-- or psychology in economics, which
is trying to introduce or use insights from psychology
and other fields to better understand economic behavior.
In particular, I'm interested in the psychology
of the poor, which we're going to learn about towards the end
of the class.
Now, what is this class about?
What do we want you to take away and learn from this class?
The key goal is to understand poverty.
What do we mean by poverty?
What is it?
Who are the poor?
Where are they?
How are their lives going on?
And how can we be perhaps help tackle poverty and improve
people's lives?
That's the key goal of this class overall,
and that's what Esther and others have started studying
at MIT in other places.
We want you to give an introduction-- get
an introduction to this topic.
Second, we want you to help learn
to formulate coherent and interesting thoughts
about poverty, and in particular learn
to reason like an economist.
That means we want to think about costs and benefits
of different policies.
We want to think about how people make decisions,
why they choose to do certain things
or not to do certain things, and how potential policies might
be able to improve people's lives
through the lens of economics.
And then one key goal is since this is an introductory class
into economics, we want you to become excited or even more
excited about economics and learn
about what the field of economics is about.

PROFESSOR: So then let's delve into the issue itself
and tell you about the magnitude of the problems.
Really when we say people are poor, what do we mean by this?
How poor are the poor?
And how do we measure how poor our country is?
This is not a rhetorical question.
I actually want to know from you.
How do we know how poor people are?
STUDENT: Sometimes you can measure GDP or GDP per capita.
PROFESSOR: What does that mean?
STUDENT: How much money does the country produce
versus how people we have.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So you take everything that's produced in a certain country
and you somehow add it all up in some ways.
And then you divide it by the number of people
who are in that country.
And that's then what people refer to as GDP per capita,
Gross Domestic Product per capita.
That tells you on average how much are
people producing in a country.
[INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] you can survive by yourself.
PROFESSOR: I see.
And so how do we measure that?
STUDENT: You just count how many people
can survive by themselves.
PROFESSOR: Right.
But suppose you wanted to ask me whether I
can survive by myself.
How do you do that?
What do you ask me?
STUDENT: I guess I don't know.
It's like if you were to remove all [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Anybody else want to elaborate on that
or have any other thoughts?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I think it's related.
There's a notion about the market basket of goods, things
across different countries that are considered
baseline necessities.
And then looking at the price of that in different countries
to compare.
PROFESSOR: Right.
You mentioned something very important,
which is how do we compare different goods
across different countries?
If I buy some food or if I buy some services,
if I get a haircut or whatever else,
that's going to be much more expensive, say, in the US
compared to other countries who are poorer.
And we're going to take that into account.
So it's not just about dollar exchange rates
but much more about how much do people actually
consume every single day.
And we need to sort take that into account.
But I want to get back to the question or the comment
from before where it was said that people
need enough to survive.
So anybody have any thoughts on how we
might be able to go about that?

Yeah.
STUDENT: I think there's a line of people
being absolutely poor.
It's like 1.25 USD per day as the daily income.
PROFESSOR: So there's an extreme poverty line,
as people call it, which is a minimum amount that people
think that people need to survive.
And what really that is is how much are people spending.
Mostly it's about covering basic needs.
In particular, food.
And this has been recently changed to $2.15.
It was $1.90 before that, which is an amount that essentially
people have tried to come up with a number which helps you
have the necessities for life.
In particular food and so on, excluding housing.
And so then you have this threshold.
And then how do you then figure out
whether somebody is above or below that threshold?
How can we figure that out?

STUDENT: Measure your income.
PROFESSOR: And how do you do that?
STUDENT: You could ask them how much money they make.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You ask them questions.
Exactly.
So we ask people questions.
You can either measure people's income
and ask them what are all your income sources?
How much money do you or your family members
and so on earn through various ways?
That's not as simple as it sounds,
because often people are self employed.
People have a farm where they grow
maize or other types of things.
And so that's not as easy as it sounds.
But we can do that.
Any other ideas of what we could do?
So one idea would be to measure people's income.
What else could we do?

Yeah.
STUDENT: Average life expectancy.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we can measure other aspects of people's lives.
But if we wanted to understand whether somebody
is above or below the poverty line,
we could measure how much money do they have or what else could
we do?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess you could see what
are those goods that they're able to obtain [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly right.
So we could also look at consumption.
We could just ask, how did how much money did you
spend on different things?
How much did you eat in particular?
How much did you spend for household goods?
How much did you spend on different categories?
And then we can try to add that up and see
how much is that per person.
So usually households are larger.
So you have to divide by the number of people.
And then you can say how much money
do people have per person.
That's exactly right.
And then there's lots of other aspects
of what does poverty entail in addition to not having money,
which we're going to including life expectancy, health
and so on, which we're going to return to in a second.
But that's exactly right.
OK, so now we want to measure how poor our country is.
So one measure that was sort of mentioned already
is the gross national income, which
is very much similar to GDP but somewhat different.
Does somebody know how that's different from GDP
by any chance?
So you said GDP, which is Gross Domestic Product, which
is everything that's produced in a country overall divided
by the number of people.
But I here have something else, which is the Gross National
Income, GNI.
What is that?
Yeah?
STUDENT: So GDP is the produce unit inside the country
and GNI is all the people, like the nationality.
PROFESSOR: Right.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: So one is about production
and the other one is about income.
So for example, so I'm from Germany.
If I were to earn some money or produce things here in the US
and send it back to Germany and people were then
receiving remittances, et cetera,
or if I'm counted just as a German citizen, which I still
am, then that would be part of the German income, not
necessarily the US one, even though things
are produced in the US.
PROFESSOR: Somebody look for--
what is the GNI of the richest country?
Can you find some countries that are rich?
What is the GNI?
And we'll be using for-- looking for is the GNI per capita.
Not overall but per person.
Per capita means per person.
Any suggestions or any ideas?
Which countries are very rich?
Just suggest anything.
Yeah?
STUDENT: The US.
PROFESSOR: The US.
And how rich are the US according to your sheet?
STUDENT: Their GNI per capita is $70,430.
PROFESSOR: $70,400.
Pretty rich.
Pretty good.
But is that the richest country in the world, or what
other countries do we have?
STUDENT: Bermuda.
PROFESSOR: Bermuda.
And how rich is Bermuda?
STUDENT: $116,530 per capita.
PROFESSOR: That is exactly right.
So that's very rich.
It's also a very small country.
So do we have another country?
That's the richest country we have here in our data.
What's the second richest after that?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Switzerland.
PROFESSOR: Switzerland.
That's correct.
How rich is Switzerland?
STUDENT: $90,360 GNI per capita.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
So $90,360.
This is income per year per person, OK?
So the average Swiss person earns or makes--
has about $90,000 available.
Notice this is all done in current exchange rates.
We just use whatever the exchange rate is.
And so we use whatever Swiss people produce, and then use
the exchange rate from the Swiss Franc to the US dollar
to convert what that is.
OK.
So those are the rich countries.
We already talked a little bit about the US.
Now, what is the GNI of the poorest country?

Any nominations?
STUDENT: Somalia.
PROFESSOR: Somalia.
How much-- what's the GNI for Somalia?
STUDENT: It says $450 per person.
PROFESSOR: $450.
OK.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Maybe Burundi?
PROFESSOR: Burundi.
Yeah.
How much is that?
STUDENT: I think it's $240.
PROFESSOR: $240.
That's exactly right.
So $240.
That's, as you can see, staggeringly lower.
That's much, much lower than Switzerland.
Much, much lower than Bermuda.
Also much, much lower than the US, as we just discussed.
$70,000.
OK.
These differences are huge.
And I just want to think about how huge these differences are.
What is the ratio between those two, between the US
and Burundi, roughly?

Anyone?
STUDENT: The ratio?
PROFESSOR: The ratio between the US and Burundi in terms of GNI.
STUDENT: Maybe around 1 to 340-ish.
PROFESSOR: 300 is pretty good.
So 293.
That's enormous.
Think about anybody that you know who you think
is pretty rich or less rich than you are
or your family might be.
Maybe they're twice as rich.
Maybe three times as rich.
Maybe four times.
Maybe half as rich.
Maybe a third.
These are already large differences.
This is 300 times as much money does
a US person have compared to somebody in Burundi,
on average, on any given day.
In fact, the GNI of the US per day is nearly as much
as the GNI for Burundi for the entire year.
A little bit less than that.
But essentially, how much money a US person has on any
given day is how much money a person in Burundi
has for most of the year.
So these are huge, huge differences.
Now, somebody was previously talking about prices,
or I think you were talking about prices.
I'm not-- what about prices?
This is using exchange rates.
Somebody was saying, we need to do something
with these exchange rates, or something is not quite right
perhaps.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Maybe you can assume that the average cost
of a good in a poor country is going
to be cheaper than the average cost of that same good
in a richer country.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly.
If I buy things in the US, things
are going to be way more expensive than if I
buy things in other countries.
That's not true for all goods, but it's
particular for goods that are services.
As mentioned, a haircut, but all sorts
of other services that you might get
are a lot cheaper in countries with lower wages, for example,
than they are in the US.
OK?
So now, what do we do?
How do we deal with that?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Maybe we just take the average
of the cost of some very common goods and services
in this country and make that as the benchmark for the cost
of the goods in that country.
PROFESSOR: That's correct.
Anybody else?
Any thoughts?

I think that was very correct.
So essentially what one uses is the GNI per capita
PPP, which is referred to as Purchasing Power Parity.
This is complicated, but the simple version of that
is that one uses a basket of goods that are being produced
and then tries to figure out how much does this basket cost
in different countries, and then tries to adjust for that.
This is kind of complicated because people
consume different things in different places.
So you have to take into account how to do that.
But we will ignore that for now.
It's a complicated thing.
Assuming somebody is able to do this and look at Purchasing
Power Parity, essentially adjusting for price levels,
what do we get?
So are the income differences going
to be smaller or larger now once we use PPP?
STUDENT: Smaller.
PROFESSOR: Smaller.
And why is that?
Just very mechanically.
How much smaller do you think it will be?

I think you said smaller.
STUDENT: I don't think it's to be that much smaller, though.
PROFESSOR: Like twice or half as big?
STUDENT: Two to three times.
PROFESSOR: Two to three times.
Pretty good.
And why?
And the reason, of course, is that in poor countries,
we're comparing rich countries and poor countries
and find large differences.
Now we're going to say, well, in fact, with whatever income you
have in poor countries, you can buy more
because things are cheaper.
So then these differences will shrink.
So now we can look at our sheet again and see what
is the GNI using PPP of the US.
What do we find?

Yeah?
STUDENT: $70,480.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
This is almost exactly the same as before.
It's using, I think, different prices in different years,
so it's slightly different.
But essentially, everything is relative to the US.
So this should be exactly or approximately the same.
OK?
So now, what about the poorest country using PPP?
What do we find?
STUDENT: Burundi?
Around $800.
PROFESSOR: And is that still the poorest country?

So Burundi is $800, we just said.
That's correct.
Yeah.
So Burundi is still the poorest country.
It's now about $800.
What's the ratio between those two?
You're pretty spot on, in fact.
It's now about 88, so that's about a third
of those differences.
Notice that these differences are still enormous.
88 times more money than somebody else
is a huge difference between being rich versus being poor.
Just happened to be born in a rich country
versus a poor country.
Notice that that is the average person.
It's just on average.
It's not a particular rich or poor person in the US
or in other places.
This is just the average person in those countries.
OK.
So now we talked about how big these differences are.
The next question we're going to ask
is, well, when you talk about the poor, whom
are we actually referring to?
Where can we find the poor?
Where are they to be found?
In which places?
And I'm going to ask you two questions.
One is, if you looked at 1800 or 200 years ago,
where would you find poor people,
and where would you find them now?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Now, people would be [INAUDIBLE] less urban areas,
whereas before they would usually
be in cities because that's where
all the opportunities were.
PROFESSOR: And in which countries, which parts
of the world?
STUDENT: In 1800s?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, anywhere, or now?

Anybody else?

So everywhere is actually exactly correct for 1800s.
If you look at 1800, you can see here
the distribution of income.
So you can see, essentially, the higher it is,
the more people are at a certain daily income per capita.
So you see on the x-axis income per capita
and how many people in the world are living
in the world for each income.
You see Europe, Asia-Pacific, Africa, and North and South
America sort of combined.
And what you see here in 1800, essentially,
pretty much everybody is poor, about something like 80%, 90%.
A lot of people are in Asia-Pacific, a lot of people,
in fact, in Europe, a lot of people in Africa,
and a lot of people in North and South America.
There's some people at the time were somewhat richer than that,
but pretty much everybody was poor at the time.
So if you wanted to find poor people at the time,
you could find them, essentially, everywhere
in the world, in cities as well as in rural areas.
Now, going forward, right now, where would
you find most poor people?

And I should be very clear about this,
as defined by extreme poverty as in below the poverty
line of about $2 per day.

STUDENT: Africa?
PROFESSOR: Africa?
Correct.

Anywhere else?
STUDENT: Asia.
PROFESSOR: Asia.
Yeah.
So Africa and Asia.
And so if you looked at 1975, in fact--
so remember red is Asia, blue is Africa.
So you see, in 1975, you'd see huge fractions of the poor,
in fact, are located in Asia and the Pacific.
You'll also see quite a few of them in Africa
and much fewer in Europe and in the Americas.
Now, if you do the same now in 2015,
you will see that a lot of the red mass
has shifted towards the right.
So lots of people in Asia have gotten richer.
But you'll see still quite a few people in Asia, as well as
in Africa.
And this is why, when you look at a lot of the studies
that you will see in this class, mostly
will be focused on African countries, as well as Asia--
in particular, India.
OK?
Now, somebody was saying previously-- sorry,
I should be very clear about this.
This is not to say that there is no poverty in the US.
Of course, there's lots of differences between the rich
and the poor in the US.
However, the levels of poverty in terms of just how much money
people have is quite different.
They are relatively poor compared
to other people in the US, but most people in the US
will be above the poverty threshold of about $2 per day.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Why isn't the poverty line further down in the 1800s?
PROFESSOR: This is sort of controlling
for price differences.
STUDENT: OK.
PROFESSOR: So it's essentially-- that's a great question.
That's what it says here at the bottom in the caption.
It says PPP adjusted, which essentially
tries to take into account that prices are, in fact, different.
Now that's a very hard thing to do
because you have to figure out what prices were
and what people consumed in 1800.
But to the best of our knowledge,
this is sort of the best we have.
So these prices here, $2, that's a different amount in 1800.
It's just converted into dollars now.
Good question.
Thank you.
Somebody previously was saying--
I was asking about monetary metrics.
I was asking about the poverty line.
I was asking about how much do people consume
or how much income do people have.
And are people above or below a certain threshold
in the poverty line?
But somebody was saying, well, poverty
is not just about income.
There are lots of other things difficult or different
for the poor.
And what are those things?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Accessibility, so even if you have money,
maybe it takes a lot more money to go somewhere to get a good--
PROFESSOR: Accessibility, as in like you mean like mobility,
or as in moving around, or just being able to buy things,
even if you have money?
STUDENT: Yeah, being able to buy things.
Like with food deserts.
PROFESSOR: I see, so access to food and other goods,
in particular, for example, in rural areas,
will be very hard to buy lots of things,
including food, but also technologies, and so on.
Even if you had money.
STUDENT: Access to a higher quality of goods and services,
a company selling organic goods, they may not put into our area.
PROFESSOR: This is very much related.
This is exactly right.
If you have high quality or a lot of new technologies, often,
they're targeted towards richer populations
because those are the people who have money that you can make
the most money often with goods that are
sold to people who are rich.
And as a result, of course, if you're poor,
it's going to be hard to buy these anyways because they're
expensive.
But even if you had more money or wanted to save a lot,
it would be hard perhaps because they might not even
be available in your area or your country.
OK, what else is different for the poor?
STUDENT: Education and--
PROFESSOR: Education-- say more?
STUDENT: Practical skills.
PROFESSOR: And what exactly-- what do you mean by education?
How would you measure this or how would you learn
about what we mean by that?
STUDENT: I'm not entirely sure, but maybe
just a basic math, basic reading in their own languages.
PROFESSOR: That's terrific.
So one measure is what do people learn or know?
So it would be basic reading, basic math, languages, and so
on.
So this is about just knowledge, what did you learn in school.
What other measures could be used
to learn about people's education?
Yeah?
What was that?
STUDENT: Time, a number of years.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, we could also
learn about years of education.
How many years did you spend in school
starting from primary school?
Did you go to school at all?
Did you complete primary school, secondary school?
Did you go to universities, and so on?
And usually, people use years of education
as sort of a summary measure of people's education overall.
And so then we have education quantity.
And then we have, in addition education quality,
it's like how much do people actually learn
conditional on being in school.
And educational quality might be a lot higher in some places
than in others.
And it's surely higher in rich countries
compared to in poor countries.
So you might even be in school but just not receive
a very good quality of education, which then will
be reflected in low knowledge of, say, basic reading
and writing skills, which we're going to talk about
in our class, as well as languages, math, and so on.
So we have education.
What else?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Might be living in more dangerous areas,
don't have access to clean water or sanitation.
They might not own their own houses
and might not have insurance or more vulnerable to this--
PROFESSOR: So you said four different things,
which I hope I can remember.
So one is physical safety.
So that's excellent.
Physical safety, and you might just not
be protected against theft, against violence, and so on.
Second, you said sanitation, just
being able to have clean water, for example,
not be exposed to pollution, and so on.
Then you said housing, people being
able to have their own housing, or just have any housing,
for that matter.
And I forgot the fourth thing, sorry.
STUDENT: Insurance.
PROFESSOR: And then finally, insurance and risk.
People are exposed to way more risk than others.
These are all excellent points and.
That's all correct.
Yes.
STUDENT: The types of jobs that they might find later.
So a richer country may have more people
working a corporate job.
Versus a poor country might have more people
working in physical labor.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly correct.
And that's in part a result of education.
If you have no education, it's hard to do a desk job,
for example, that involves a computer.
How are you going to do this if you don't
know how to read and write?
So there's a lot of physical jobs
and manual labor among the poor compared to more IT, tech
jobs, et cetera among richer populations who
are more educated.
So we talked about-- yeah?
STUDENT: Expanding on the insurance part,
maybe having access to good healthcare
or being able to afford the healthcare.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so say more.
STUDENT: I was going to say having access to healthcare
is important because it also influences
your day-to-day life in terms of if you're
able to get groceries, if you're able to go to school,
and things like that.
PROFESSOR: So you're saying healthcare,
it's also health itself.
So which is one, healthcare would be access to doctors,
access to medication, be that, for example, vaccination,
be that any types of medication in case people fall sick,
access to good hospitals, access to nurses, and so on.
So that's about healthcare.
And so you could measure them in terms
of how many doctors are in a country,
how many nurses are in a country, how many beds are
in hospital available close to you, and so on.
So that's one measure of quality and quantity of healthcare.
The second thing I think you were saying as well
is just health quality itself.
How good is your health?
This could be things like how likely are
you to get certain diseases?
It could be how likely are you to fall sick?
How likely are you to live beyond a certain age?
In particular, under five mortality,
for example, how many children live until age five,
what fraction of children lives until age five.
Could be life expectancy overall.
How old do people get, which is a very good summary of how
healthy people are overall.
And then as you said exactly, there's
also then quality of life.
If you're really sick and have a lot of diseases,
you might just have a lower quality of life
as a result of that, even if you're able to survive.
Anything else?

It's a pretty good list.
I think we covered most of the things that I mentioned.
We didn't quite talk about malnutrition.
We talked about this at the beginning, which
is just having enough food, which is very basic need.
Education and literacy we talked about.
We talked about child mortality and life expectancy at birth.
We talked less about happiness and mental health.
It turns out that being rich is very much
predictive of how happy you are or how happy you say you are,
at least.
It's also very much predictive of people's mental health.
So overall, richer people, compared to poorer people,
are happier and have better mental health.
For example, richer people are less
likely to be depressed, and anxious, and so on.
So that's a key difference between places,
on average, of course.
Then there's medical care.
We talked about health, as well as safety risk,
or safety nets and exposure to risks.
I want to just spend a couple of minutes.
So just pointing out how huge these differences are.
These differences are enormous.
For example, if you look at mortality rate of children
under age five, if you look at-- this
is in 2015, if you look at Somalia, this is about 12.7%.
So 12.7% of children do not reach age five.
While this is about 0.2% in Iceland.
This is a 60-fold difference.
So 60 times more likely to--
a child is 60 times more likely to die in Somalia compared
to Iceland.
Life expectancy at birth in Japan is about 84 years.
While in Sierra Leone, it's about 52.
That's a difference of about 32 years.
That on average, a person lives longer in Japan
compared to Sierra Leone.
When you look at mean schooling years,
it's 14.1 years in Germany.
Germans love school and go all to school.
Instead, it's about 1.5 years in Burkina Faso.
This is also in 2017.
Similarly, expected years of schooling on average income,
we already talked about.
So these differences are enormous.
These are staggering differences overall.
And there's lots of--
to be done to try and figure out,
well, what might be able to do to improve
the lives of the poor and sort of try to lower
some of these differences.
I'm going to stop here now and hand over
to Esther, who will tell you that some progress, at least,
has already been made.
So you might say things are terrible,
and what can we do, and throw up our hands in the air,
and be sad about it.
But in fact, lots of progress has already been made.
And we're going to study, and try and learn,
and how to perhaps do that or what
policies might be able to help.
PROFESSOR: If you guys were alive in the last few years,
you might be tempted to think that the world is going to hell
in a hand basket very fast.
After all, you did most of your high school in COVID times.
And then as soon as we seem to more or less get
a little bit used to the COVID situation, the war in Ukraine
started.
And food prices increased.
And the energy prices increased.
And food prices increased-- in fact,
particularly costly for people in poor places
because a lot of their budget is on food.
But, in fact, I'm here to tell you
that if we take a slightly longer view, maybe
starting in the 1990s--
well, none of you were born, presumably.
Things have really looking been looking up
and up and up for the poorest people in the world.
It's not to say that there hasn't been crisis,
there hasn't been difficulties in our own countries,
for example, rising inequality, worry about climate change.
But if we take the perspective of the poorest
person in the world, maybe someone who
lives in Burundi or in Togo, there
has been tremendous increase in their quality of life,
hopefully with a big acceleration since 1990.
And I want you to keep that in mind
because that's going to be with us for the rest of this class,
finding the reasons for this increase
and finding whether we can leverage
on some of this improvement to get things even better
in years to come, despite the challenges
that we'll experience.
So starting with poverty, just in the number of people living
under $1.90 a day, there has been a tremendous fall
in the number of poor people.
Since the 1980's and roughly since 1990,
the number of poor people has been
divided by 2, the number of extremely poor people.

To be perfectly honest, a lot of these poor people
who are not that poor anymore lived in only two countries.
Do you know what these two countries are?
STUDENT: China?
PROFESSOR: China, and?
STUDENT: India.
PROFESSOR: India.
So a lot of the poverty reduction
in terms of number of people going right above poverty
is due to China and India for two reasons.
They were countries that started very poor,
so with a lot of people just below $1.90.
And they experienced fast growth.
So it's a big mass of people who could get out
of poverty in years to come.
When people like the World Bank, for example,
did poverty projection, which I'll show you in a minute,
they were predicting a slow-down of the decrease in poverty
simply because we are now reaching the point where
there is nobody really poor left in China and very few in India.
And then after that, further poverty reduction
will have to come, in particular from Africa,
where growth has been lower.
But nonetheless, it's still a very large number
of people who are not living in situations where, as one of you
put it very aptly, they don't have
enough to live by themselves.
If we look at other dimensions of quality of life,
obviously, being alive would count as a pretty
important one, one would say.
In 1800, the global average life expectancy was only 29 years.
And most of the map was in red, with people having
life expectancy below 40.
By 1950, things had improved, but pretty much exclusively
in the richer countries, so big improvement in Europe with life
expectancy 1950 in my home country,
France, of 66 years old, improvement in North America,
in Australia, and not at all in Africa, South Asia, and China
by 1975.
By 2015, the life expectancy has continued
to improve in the richer countries.
But the big story is how fast it has increased in the poorer
countries.
Look at India.
Today, India, in 2015 has a life expectancy of 68 years.
It is what it was in France when we looked
at the map a few years ago.
Even in Africa, we have life expectancy
of 62 years old in South Africa--
looking at the countries in East Africa, 65, 67.
So there is really an improvement
in life expectancy coming mainly from a big improvement in child
mortality.
Child mortality has really collapsed in poorer countries.
It has also declined actually everywhere.
But this is a place where we see what the economists like
to call convergence, which is from situations that are very
different, you converge towards something that
looks a little bit similar.
Of course, for child mortality, we
would like to see everyone converging towards zero.
But we are seeing now, kids, and this
is kids dying before the age of five, only Africa is above 5%.
But it's well below 10%.
And if we are lucky enough to extrapolate
to trend of child mortality in Africa, we'll also go below 5%
very soon.
And this is quite remarkable because Africa
is one continent where the decrease in poverty
has not been as high.
Growth in most of the countries in Africa has been slow.
So people haven't become much poorer
in terms of income poverty, in terms of how much goods
they are able to afford.
Their governments haven't been much richer either.
And yet, they managed to get this tremendous fall in poverty
due to--
well, that's what we'll have to find out in this class.
Due to what?
It's not from more money being available in total
in the countries.
But it's from a more targeted use
of the money to this problem, so a greater focus
on essential aspect of lives, the ones you guys
mentioned when we were discussing
what it is to be poor, health and education and nutrition,
more focus on this at the international level,
but very importantly within each and every
of the countries, even countries that remain super poor.
And because of this greater focus,
there's a greater pragmatism, I would say,
in adopting things that work.
So even in 1990, there was perhaps
in many countries, many poorer countries, more focus on,
oh, we need to grow.
We are going to become the next Taiwan or the next Hong
Kong or the next Sri Lanka through the mechanism
of a rapid economic growth.
And then now, it's not saying that there is not an ambition
of economic growth also.
But on top of that, there is, well, the first thing
we need to do is to make sure that our citizens are
alive to experience whatever growth comes.
And they are focused on simple things like safe conditions
for delivery for the mother, for the child, therapies
to fight HIV, building schools next to every home
so kids can go to school, and so on.
So in that sense, the year of 1990 to 2019,
development economists were the happiest
of the economists in terms of seeing a story that was mainly
a lot of progress to be made because we are starting
from such a worse situation to start with--
but on the other hand, fast progress.

PROFESSOR: Now, of course, the COVID-19 pandemic arrived.
And that was a huge setback.
Now I don't need to tell you who we are in high school
during COVID-19 that it was a huge setback.
But for people in poor countries,
it was such a worse setback than for us.
So of course, there was enormous health impact of the COVID-19
pandemic across the world.
What is remarkable though is that if you look at the impact,
the pure health impact on the poor countries,
with the exception of India that got
hit by a really horrendous delta wave,
many of the poor countries didn't suffer much more
from COVID-19 than richer countries.
And in fact, in Africa, the number
of deaths or cases of COVID-19 are surprisingly low.
I'm saying surprisingly because nobody has fully
understood why to my knowledge to fully
but it's something that people are working on.
So Africa has relatively low COVID.
India is in the high mark.
The rest of the developing countries
are across the spectrum.
But from a health perspective, the COVID-19 pandemic
was really worldwide and didn't affect
the poor countries worse.
However, the economic shock was actually much worse
in the poor countries.
Why?
Because when economic activity suddenly
shut down in the spring of 2020, in the rich countries
there was the fiscal power to do what it takes
to protect their citizens.

So the rich countries spent about 24% of their GDP
on fiscal stimulus measures.
Let me take a pause for a second.
What's a fiscal stimulus measure in plain English?
Yeah.
STUDENT: It's when the government puts money
into the economy so that people will spend more money
and get that cash flow between people.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So what's an example of a fiscal stimulus measure that was
taken in the US, for example?

STUDENT: The PPP loans that governments were handing out
to small businesses.
PROFESSOR: That's an example.
Absolutely.
Another one?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Stimulus checks.
PROFESSOR: Stimulus check.
Exactly.
A third one is--
go ahead.
STUDENT: Government spending on the research for life-saving--
PROFESSOR: Yes, absolutely.
That also counts as stimulus.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I think they gave money to the airline industries
in some--
PROFESSOR: Right.
So that's along the line of PPP loan, business support.
Another way to get money straight
into the hands of the people, it was quite contested
for a while.

So there was stimulus check and then there was another big one.

Unemployment.
Extended unemployment insurance.
So at the beginning of COVID, unemployment insurance
was given at a much higher level than before.
So in most states, people could make much more money being
unemployed than being employed.
That lasted for a while, then that stopped.
But that really protected people.
As a result, in the US, there was actually
a reduction of absolute poverty, the US poverty line.
There was a reduction of the number of people in poverty
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
In Europe, similarly.
In Europe, what governments did is that they paid businesses
to keep people employed.
So that amounted to 24% of GDP.
The consequences of that is that, in Europe
and in the US, as soon as economies could reopen,
people basically roared back into their various activities.
There wasn't a very slow coming back to life.
In fact, things pretty much overheated,
which was one of the reasons for inflation and so on.
But unemployment rate is extraordinarily
low by historical standards in the US and similarly in Europe.
So there was no--
basically, people were protected during the pandemic
and there was no time wasted in restarting
once the pandemic was over.
Now in the poorer countries-- so how could rich countries
finance this effort?
STUDENT: Taxes?
PROFESSOR: Did the taxes increase during the COVID-19
pandemic in the US?

Not really.
STUDENT: Debt?
PROFESSOR: Debt.
Exactly.
They could go borrow.
And in fact, the phrase that was used in France
was whatever it takes.
So they could borrow and they borrowed trillions
of dollars literally, which was the right thing
to do because if they had not sent trillions of money,
people would have gotten into deep problem
and they would have spent a lot more money to get them out
of the problem later.
So it made a lot of sense.
But it relies on this ability to go and borrow
from their citizens or from the general market.
The poor countries didn't have this ability.
So while the rich countries were spending
24% of their GDP on stimulus measures,
the poor countries spent 2% of their GDP
on stimulus measures, the poorest countries,
2% of a much smaller GDP so very little money.
And the consequence was that can just
invert everything you said and say this didn't
happen in poor countries.
So there was no research targeted to COVID
that is relevant to the poor countries.
There was no way to keep the schools open.
They were the first to close and they never
reopened for two years.
There was no money to support businesses.
And a lot of them collapsed.
There was no money for people to support
people who lost their job.
And in India, within days of the confinement, millions of people
found themselves in the streets to go home.
So they didn't have this ability to protect themselves.
And so as a result, a lot of people fell into poverty.
These were the projection of poverty reduction pre-COVID.
And this is what happened during COVID.
It's kind of nowcasting because we don't have
the official data for 2020 yet.
But that's the assumption that we
move from it would have been about 621
million people in poverty.
We move to 740 million in poverty.
And then what we don't really know
is what's going to happen in the future,
how quickly is it going to fall back.
Can we converge or are we going to really-- do
we have a permanent slowdown?
Of course, it's not helped now by the fact
that the prices of food have increased
and that mechanically increased poverty
because food is such an important part of the budget
for people in poor countries.
So this is something that we don't know.
That's something that I cannot project for you what's going
to happen in the future.
Economists are anyway terrible about predicting the future.
So if anybody makes a projection, don't believe them.
But it's certainly a challenge.
And the more you guys understand what people face,
what difficulties they face in their ordinary life
from having little money and from being poor,
the more equipped you will be in thinking
about how we can act as a world or in rich countries moving
forward.
The world has found it remarkably difficult
to share global public goods.
So once vaccinations were available,
it really stood to reason that we should share the vaccines.
First of all, it's kind of the ethically
the right thing to do.
Second of all, because this was such a worldwide pandemic,
any increase in the pandemic somewhere
would have what consequence?

If there is an increase somewhere,
what happens to us several months
later or several weeks later?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Comes back to other countries.
PROFESSOR: It comes back to other countries.
A very obvious example was the Delta wave in India.
The US thought they were out of the dog days of the pandemic.
And then the Delta wave happened in India.
And by the summer, it was in the US.
And it caused so many deaths.
So it was just even if no one-- if someone
didn't care at all about what's happening
in other countries, which is a weird thing
to think in any case, it was clear that we are one world.
And yet so countries got together
to create a fund which would have allowed people
to countries to buy--
which would have bought vaccines for the poor countries.
It's called the COVAX fund.
Countries put money in the COVAX fund
but then they immediately bought all the vaccine
doses available such that the COVAX fund had nothing to buy.
And that went on for months during the pandemic,
although that's now getting solved
because there are many more vaccine doses available.
But that was a big issue at the beginning of the pandemic.
So one of the things we have to think about
is how do we as a world manage global public good.
The next one that comes immediately
on the heel of COVID and it was made painfully obvious
this summer by the catastrophic weather events
is climate change, which is produced
at the level of the world because the CO2 emission
in China or in the US affects the life of people
in Africa or in South America.
But where the consequences in terms of everyday lives
are particularly acute for people in poor countries
who live in places where it's already hot.
So the impact of any one more degree
is higher when you start from a higher level.
And in addition, live with places
which, as we saw in the previous slides,
have just less resources and ability to protect themselves
of shocks.
So the bottom line is that a ton of progress was made.
Through a combination of international efforts,
for example, the spread of antibiotics,
the spread of new agricultural varieties that
are more productive, the spread of technology
also like the telephone, for example,
tremendous amount of progress was made.
Through this combination of collective action,
as well as effective government action
in the poor countries themselves,
but this progress is kind of not without fragility
due to the big crisis that can hit the world at one
point or another, COVID being an example, the war in Ukraine
being the current one, and the climate change
is being the next one.
And so to the extent you get prepared,
think about what are going to be the implications for others who
live lives that are less privileged than ours,
to what extent--
how can these countries prepare, mitigate, and adapt
this crisis?
And what are the type of actions that also rich countries can
take in helping them?
Then you can be a big part of the solution.

So if you want more on this, and I hope you want more,
you can look at various sources of data that help you visualize
some of these data.
So Gapminder has lots of tools.
Hans Rosling, who has now passed away,
is the one that put it together.
And he describes some of these data.
Our World in Data is a continuing evolving source.
A lot of the graphs that we presented today
come from Our World in Data.
They are putting together a lot of data that exists.
And it's very interesting stuff.

PROFESSOR: So I want to finish the substantive part
of the class before we get into some logistic issue for today.
Talking about just one person.
And this person, it's a long time ago.
It's 1983.
So I don't think-- it's not current event
I'm talking about.
But it's from a book called A Quiet Violence
by two journalists who--
economist journalists who live in rural Bangladesh
in the '70s, particularly a difficult time in Bangladesh.
So think of a very, very poor place.
And things have gotten much better since.
So it's a story of one peasant family.
The story is on Canvas.
Please read it by yourself when you go home.
The first visit, Abu is sick.
He has not been able to work for the past three weeks
because he is sick and his six children are hungry.

The only person who is earning any money in the family
is his oldest, [INAUDIBLE],, a daughter who is still a child,
maybe 8 or 10.
She gets a quarter of kilo of rice for husking rice all day.
Husking is you take the rice.
The rice, it goes inside a little pocket
and you need to shake it to remove the husk.
So she does that and she gets a quarter of kilo of rice.
Although he's sick, he hasn't gone to the doctor
because it cost money, 100 takas, and he doesn't have it.
So that's their first visit.
And then they strike up a conversation
to try and understand how he arrived to this situation.
And he explained that, in fact, he
used to come from a relatively comfortable, not super
comfortable but somewhat comfortable
farming family who had enough land to live on.
But his mother got sick, so he sold some of the land
to buy medicine for his mother.
And then she died anyway.

Then the land was divided and they had a number of children.
So the land that they had that was left to them
was not longer enough.
It was no longer sufficient to feed everyone.
So they took some loans when they didn't have enough food
from a money lender, and the rate of interest was very high.
So to supplement his income from the land, from his own land,
and to reimburse these loans and to manage
the everyday expenses, he started working
for a landlord for a wage.
But the wage is 1 million a kilo of 25 of rice a day.
So not a lot of rice for his whole family.

He could make more money if he was a sharecropper.
But when you're a sharecropper, you basically
take full responsibility of a patch of land.
You do the entire harvest and then
you give half to the landlord.
And the problem with that is that only comes after--
you only get money after the harvest is done.
And you need to pay for the inputs and so on.
So it wasn't able to do sharecropping.
And at least when you work for a wage, you're paid immediately.
But this is a very low wage.
So it's not enough.
So he got more money by mortgaging some of his land
to the landlord.
So the landlord gave him money in exchange of putting
his land as collateral.
And that is where they were.
At this point, there still was optimistic
because he had planted a jackfruit tree four years ago.
Do you know what a jackfruit is?

Do you know what a jackfruit is?
It's kind of like durian but not really.
It's spiky.
Yeah.
It's a spiky thing, big-ish, and you make it curry with it
and it's very nice.
Plants a jackfruit.
A jackfruit tree with many jackfruit.
Not as odorant as durian and it's more caloric which
feeds more people.
So his idea is that in a couple of years,
the jackfruit tree will yield fruits
and then he'll be able to sell the fruit
and get good money from it.
So that's his plan for the future.
A few months later, they come back.
Finally, Abu had sold land to pay the doctor.
His wife doesn't have any work.
In the lean season, he can also not find work,
although he's not sick anymore.
So they are starving.
So he decides to cut down the jackfruit tree
and he sells the wood for 25 takas.
And it never got any fruit.



True or False? Determining whether somebody is below the poverty line requires measuring their income.



True.

False.

Why is it important to adjust income using Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) numbers?



Because some countries are more expensive to live in than others.

Because each country’s government sets its own poverty line.

Because exchange rates are too volatile.


Select all that apply. On average, people in poor countries have…



Higher child mortality rate

Lower life expectancy

Fewer years of education

Lower PPP-adjusted income

True or false? Since 1950, due to worsening inequality the gap in life expectancy between rich and poor countries has increased.



True

False


How did the COVID-19 pandemic impact poor countries differently than rich countries?



The health impacts were more severe in poor countries.

Poor countries were less able to finance fiscal stimulus measures.





