PROFESSOR: So today, we're going to talk about the psychology
of poverty.
First we're going to talk about what
I'm going to call the myth of the happy poor,
which is sort of the idea that the poor are all very happy
and it's not so bad to be poor because everybody is like just
happy and enjoys their lives.
And in fact, perhaps more so than the rich.
Then we're going to talk a bit about financial concerns,
the idea that worries about money and whether
worries about money--
that people have lots of worries about money if they're poor,
and whether that now affects workers productivity.
So the idea that being poor itself
might have some effect on people's ability to earn money.
And then I'm going to tell you a little bit about some work we
have been doing on sleep among the urban poor in India.
OK.
So first, let's just start with thinking a little bit about how
might poverty affect well-being do we think the poor are--
and I, perhaps, already gave this away,
but do we think the poor are happy versus not,
or why might we think the poor are happy versus not happy?
What are some reasons why we might
think they might be particularly happy or not happy,
compared to the rich?
Yeah?
STUDENT: In a way, there's this idea
that in a rural, bucolic context,
you might be happier away from the concerns of work,
not have a stable work that tortures you
or not have that much.
So there might be this idealistic view that once you
not hassled by the rhythms of the day-to-day life,
then that also fast-paced, you might be happier in a simpler,
more--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You might say, oh, there's all these stresses of urban life
and of our stressful jobs and so on.
And if we all just went back to living in villages,
it would be less stressful and maybe more restful
and people might be happier.

Any other thoughts?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You might be super stressed
because there's no safety net.
Yeah, [INAUDIBLE] a safety net makes you less
stressed on the day-to-day if the weather
goes bad, [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Right.
So there's essentially-- there's two things,
I think, you are saying.
One is there's lots of uncertainty in the sense
that lots of shocks are happening.
And two, there's less margin for error in a sense
that if you have another shock, you're
one shock away from just not having enough money to eat
or just not having enough money to pay for your medical bills,
to get health care, and so on.
And if you're very rich, you might have a lower uncertainty
in a sense that you might have more ways
to purchase insurance or other ways in which you're like
more diversified and so on.
But in particular, even if shocks happen,
you'll most likely be fine because you
have more margin for error.
Anybody else?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You might be worse off because you
have to make more decisions throughout the course
of the day, just about, is this necessary [INAUDIBLE]..
A lot time, if you're better off,
decisions are made for you by your employer.
So there's more decisions that go into your day-to-day.
PROFESSOR: Interesting.
Yeah.
So there's more for you to decide.
You have more responsibilities, in some ways.
I think that's right.
There's fewer defaults that society
sets for people that automatically bring them
into the right direction.
One good example might be health insurance, automatic savings,
and these types of provisions that in many,
at least in the US or in Europe, in many places,
many of the rich at least have access to almost automatically
unless you opt out explicitly.
Yes, Lucas?
STUDENT: Well, it could be--
unhappiness could be limited though,
by the fact that they don't have as much access to information
and therefore, not as much access
to comparison, like comparing themselves to other people.
PROFESSOR: Oh, that's really interesting.
Yeah so, I think that's an interesting idea.
So as you might say, well, you live in a village,
say in India, and everybody is relatively poor, so there's, A,
I guess, and I think you were implying that lower
inequality in some ways.
And there's less of other people being
much richer than you are, this rat race and who's
the best and the most educated and this and that,
while in rich areas, that might be much more the case.
But then second, I think you're saying
there's also less information in some ways,
and why we in general think that information is good.
Knowing stuff is good.
It makes you better off in various ways.
Perhaps knowing a lot about inequality
and how rich other people are and how good
or how smart and good looking, et cetera,
everybody else is might be sort of accentuated
if you have more information, be that through social media
or direct contacts in cities and so on.
Interesting.
Yeah?
STUDENT: I think one thing that I
imagine would be big is also how you relate to your children
in the sense that you know that you perhaps don't have
the means to provide them with the future you would like
to provide them with, and that might
be a big source of unhappiness, or--
PROFESSOR: I see.
So that would be interesting.
So that would be like aspirations directly,
where you say, well, you want your children to become rich.
You want them to be healthy and so on.
And that might be like a burden on parents
if they think they don't have so many possibilities in life,
for example, because school is not available.
Anything else?

OK.
So I put down quite a few negative.
Parts one, most obvious part is material deprivation
in some way.
If you're poor, you just can't buy stuff,
and buying stuff generally makes people happy, just
being able to buy whatever you want to buy, be that household
necessity, be that issues related to health care,
be that clothes you want to buy, be that presents
you want to make other people.
Lots of things you just can't buy if you're poor,
and that just buying things overall, at least in general,
makes people happy.
There's more exposure to environmental factors,
for example, noise, environmental pollution,
sleeping conditions, et cetera.
And all of those things always factors
that make people less happy.
If you constantly are exposed to lots of noise and pollution,
that's not going to be good for your well-being.
We talked a little bit already about health.
Poor health is a very clear predictor of well-being,
in part, because of physical pain.
So if you have health conditions and have lots of physical pain,
then that's bad for your well-being.
There's also lots of worries about health,
worries about health condition.
There's also lots of early death in low-income countries,
as we already discussed-- under-five mortality and so on.
It's extremely traumatic to have a child die, for example.
And that's just really bad for well-being,
and that just happens much more for poor people
than for rich people.
And certainty in shocks, we already talked a bit about.
There's also lots more physical pain
but also mental pain coming from painful and undignified work
in some ways, in the sense of work that
threatens people's dignity, work that's humiliating in some way.
For example, I was talking to some sewage workers in Chennai
for a while, and I was asking them about alcohol at the time.
And I was asking them, why do you drink as much as you do?
And they would say, well, our work is really humiliating
and it's really difficult to do.
There's horrible smells, and it's just really uncomfortable.
So they're essentially drinking during work
to make their work bearable, in some way.
So similarly, lots of low-income workers
with relatively low education would not
be able to do desk jobs or other types of jobs,
essentially, that require education,
therefore engage in hard physical labor,
and that's very painful.
And pain, again, is very bad for people's well-being.
Then there's no social status and exclusion.
If you're at the bottom of society
and compare yourself to others, that's
not good for your well-being.
There's also the idea of freedom in a sense
that freedom of being able to do whatever you want to do.
If you're poor, you have much fewer possibilities.
If you want to just move to some other place in the city,
it's not if you're poor, you can just say,
I'm going to move there and buy a house or rent an apartment.
If you're very poor, you might not be able to do that.
And then there are a bunch of other reasons
that were already mentioned.
There could also be some positive impacts, or at least
people hypothesized that.
The reason why I'm not going to focus on that
so much because the empirical relationship, as I'm
going to show you, is relatively clear that shows essentially,
being poor is bad for your well-being.
But that could be things like, maybe people
are less stressed by career ambitions
and all these other types of things that we just mentioned.
I'm not saying these things are not necessarily at play,
but empirically, it's the case that the negative effects
tend to largely outweigh the positive ones.
PROFESSOR: OK.
So now we talked a little bit about happiness and well-being,
but how might you even measure happiness and well-being
overall?
If you wanted to figure out how happy is your friend,
how are you going to do that?

Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you ask them.
Good.
Now if your friend is American, they're
going to say I'm doing great.
So now how do you find out whether your friend
is really happy?

STUDENT: Could you observe them?
If they are crying they are not happy.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you can look at emotions.
Exactly.
You could look at facial expressions and so on.
What else?
Yes?
STUDENT: I don't know if you can do this with neuroscience,
but can you just know the dopamine levels or something?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you can measure, essentially--
for example, you can measure things like stress and so on.
You can just measure--
Mikey has studied neuroscience so he might know more.
You can measure at least some stuff
that's indicative of people's emotion in some ways.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Hormonal activity in general, I think,
can [INAUDIBLE] estrogens or cortisol.
I mean, you just--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
For example, there's some studies
people have done to measure cortisol as a sort of biomarker
of stress, and if people are stressed generally
they're not particularly happy.
Any other ideas of what we could do?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Can we maybe talk to them over time
and then see the slight variation
that we have a normalization.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I think that's what generally people try
to do, where generally if you look
at places in different countries,
if you look at Germans they would generally tell you
they're not particularly happy and so are pretty grumpy
overall.
If you look at people in the US but in particular also
in South and Central America, you
would find people generally would
report higher levels of well-being and so on and so
forth.
And so then you might say, well, that's not
necessarily indicative of people's actual well-being,
but perhaps we can look at differences over time
or across people within a specific place that
picks up more cultural or other types of reasons why people
report things differently.
Yeah?
STUDENT: I don't know if this is feasible at all,
but sometimes being confronted with an image of yourself
or the description of yourself might give you
a lot of perspective.
So I mean, sometimes either seeing
a picture of how you look or hearing
a description of your life might make your answer much more
honest and realize--
I don't know how feasible this is, but just--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I'm wondering about surveys.
Yeah, I think just telling people about--
asking people about their lives in general
and seeing then how they react or how enthusiastically they
might sort of report that.

Might be feasible to do.
That's not necessarily what people have done,
but in principle that's one one could do so.
So I think we talked about most of these you can
have sort of observer ratings.
There's some interesting work in the Media Lab
and so on that look at facial features or videos and so on.
They essentially try to predict are you happy based on that,
like how much do you smile and other sort of ways
in which people move their faces and so on.
Also, then real time self reports or retrospective self
reports of mood, pain, pleasure, happiness, and so on.
There's sort of stuff like heart rates
and so on that we can measure.
There's also vocal measures, measuring of brainwaves,
et cetera, that people have tried
to at least do to try to predict how happy people are.
Now in reality, what we often do is use survey questions.
One of these survey questions that people
have been doing-- there's questions usually about life
satisfaction.
This is to say how satisfied are you
with your life as a whole overall, which
is more saying you sort of evaluate your life overall.
And then other questions more like affect questions,
which is more about, say, happiness, which is to say,
did you experience any happiness or joy or pain,
et cetera, yesterday or so on?
And then there's other measures that are
more on the more extreme scale.
If you wanted to know whether somebody has,
say, anxiety disorder or depression,
you could ask screening surveys that ask people about those.
Those are more sort of extreme conditions, if you want,
that are specific conditions that
are very much correlated with well-being as well.
Now, some people say we should just use these happy measures
instead of, say, GDP or at least how use happy
measures directly as policy objective.
Anybody see a problem with that or what's an issue with that?

Instead of GDP we could just say,
let's just measure happiness.

Yeah?
STUDENT: It seems much harder to get an objective measure as
opposed to something numerical.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Exactly.
It's harder to have an objective measure,
and it's also easier to manipulate.
And there's some interesting studies, for example,
like a classic old study that looked
at the correlation between general happiness and happiness
with dating.
And what they did is they asked people--
just sort of randomized, essentially,
the order of these questions, and they
asked some people first about the happiness
in their dating life and then they asked them
about their general happiness.
And for others they asked them first
about the general happiness, and then asked them about happiness
with dating.
And what they find is if you ask the general happiness
question first the correlation is
0.16, which is relatively low.
It's much higher if you ask it second.
Why is that, or what's happening here?

Yeah?
STUDENT: If you ask the question about dating first,
they've already formed an association with happiness
in your mind, and that's more likely--
you're going from specific to a specific versus
if you're going from the broader to the more specific,
you're going to have less correlation
PROFESSOR: Right, so to be going from specific to broad
versus the other way around, but why does that matter?
STUDENT: Because you're more thinking
about the specific thing when you're
talking about your happiness.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So if you think about your general happiness,
if I ask you, how are you doing overall?
You might have many things in your life.
You might have how well are you doing in classes, how
are your friendships going, how are things with your family,
how is your dating life, and many other things that make
you happy or unhappy overall.
And somehow if I ask you in general, how happy are you?
You might give me a weighted average
of these different components somehow.
There's a question how to aggregate these, which
is who knows, but you're going to aggregate them somehow
in some ways.
Now, if instead I ask you first, or anybody first,
about their dating life, they're going to very much focus
on their dating life and put--
that's made very salient.
And then arguably what's happened here then
is that that gets a lot more weight compared
to other characteristics because that's top of mind
or that's what people really think about when
answering those questions.
Now, that's not to say one shouldn't use these questions.
It's just to say that they're more easily manipulated,
say, than GDP data.
Notice that GDP data is also being manipulated generally,
in particular, in autocratic societies as people
have shown with very nice nightlight type of data.
However, it's sort of we trust these numbers
more than questions about happiness.
But nevertheless, of course, we can learn a lot about--
from questions asking about happiness directly.
PROFESSOR: For what it's worth, let's
look at questions about life satisfaction.
What you see here is questions on life satisfaction.
This is a self-reported answer to the following question,
"please imagine a ladder with steps
numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the top.
The top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you.
The bottom of the ladder represents the worst
possible life for you.
On which step of the ladder would
you say you personally feel you stand at this time?"
You can think about what you would answer to this question
right now.
Maybe don't answer that during lecture,
because maybe then whatever my lecture quality is
might affect your life satisfaction.
But in general, I think it's worth
thinking about what would even answer to those questions.
What you see in these types of figures here,
now-- you see essentially averages across countries.
And what you see in general is that North America,
Latin America, and Europe tend to-- and Australia--
tend to do a lot better.
This is green or darkish green type of areas.
Well, if you look at other countries--
in particular, in Africa-- you get more
into orange or red territory.
So that's to say that people in rich countries
enjoy higher happiness and life satisfaction.
This is very robust.
You can ask very different questions.
Generally, you find-- essentially,
you will find that people in richer countries
will report that they're happier, that they enjoy
their life more, and so on.
That's a very robust finding across places.
Yeah?
STUDENT: How are people that are surveyed
in these sub-Saharan countries in the red
and the dark orange-- how are they able to empirically
understand their [? lower? ?] Because I feel like if you live
somewhere where everybody is making $2 a day,
and they live off $2 a day, how would you
be able to understand that there's opportunity out there
to live off more.
Because if everybody around you is living in a similar manner,
and you're asked, are you living your best
life, how do you know that--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
That's a great question.
So I think you're asking several questions.
And I think so first, you might say, well,
who are we even surveying, and do we even
have survey data for everybody?
Notice that here are some gray spots here.
These are countries that are actually not surveyed.
There's no data.
Generally, these Gallup or other types of organization
try to have representative data.
That's to say they try to have actually-- they
put in a lot of effort to make sure
that we have a representative sample of people
who are being surveyed.
Then you're asking a second question, I think--
or maybe that was the only question-- that's asking well,
do people understand this question?
Or how do they translate this question properly?
And so on.
And I think you're exactly right that in a way,
the question as it did ask here--
it's "what's your best possible life that you could have?"
and so on--
is very subjective, and frankly I'm
not quite sure how I would answer this question myself.
Now, you would think that the forces that you are talking
about to say, well, if I'm in a village in an African country,
I might say, well everybody is poor.
So my life is actually pretty good,
and I just don't know, necessarily, how rich people
are in other places.
So I'm going to rate myself higher than I otherwise would.
Notice that what you're saying [? that ?] would actually
in some ways, if people knew how rich people are
in other places, they would probably
report even lower numbers.
So in a way--
in some sense-- what you are measuring here,
if the surveys are not properly translated or just don't really
make that much sense to people, you
would think that, if anything, the true numbers here should
be even lower than in reality.
But I think the other answer to your question
is there's also a bunch of other questions,
such as these, that people ask just
about how satisfied are you with your life as a whole
these days?
Or, are you happy right now?
And so on.
And those types of questions tend
to generate quite similar answers in terms of patterns
at least across places.
So this is-- as you said, that's around the globe.
Now notice that if you ask these questions--
so this is now looking at-- this is more systematically
similar to what we just showed you before,
but now plotting, essentially, GDP on the x-axis
or on a log scale and life satisfaction on the y-axis.
And what you see essentially like a very clear relationship
that essentially says, the richer a country
is, the higher people's self-reported life satisfaction
is.
And notice there, you could even look at-- we see here
in different colors-- you see essentially different
continents, for example, and blue colors.
You see the African countries, you see Europe,
and you see even within those types of color patterns,
you see an increasing slope, which
seems to say that even if you take
into account cultural issues.
Or just issues about knowledge and other types
of understanding of questions and so on,
you see, essentially, increasing patterns, essentially
to say richer countries are happier.
Now in addition, what we can do is
we can look at countries over time.
As countries-- so this is cross-sectional
at one point in time, comparing rich places to poor places.
Instead, what you can also do is you
can look at growth over time.
And this is a very nice plot.
It's a little funny, but I think it's actually quite effective.
What it does, essentially, is to say take any country
that we have here, and look at the slope
at as the country grows.
How does happiness change?
And what you essentially see is that overall,
so countries grow-- as in once a country grows,
they go to the right--
if you see the arrow being essentially increasing,
that means essentially that happiness goes up.
Let's say we survey people in one year,
and then in the following year, we see in the following year
the country is richer, then we will
find that people are also happier,
report higher levels of happiness.
And you see, essentially, almost all of these arrows
in all the places, essentially, are sort of upward sloping.
That is to say as countries grow,
their citizens report higher levels of well-being.
Does that make sense?

OK.
Now-- so this is about measures of life satisfaction
and happiness and so on, which is
sort of a general measure of how people
are feeling about themselves.
Another thing you could do is you
could look at things like prevalence
of depression and anxiety.
Now, these are more extreme conditions
that are more rare in the population overall.
So at each point in time, something 3%, 4% of people
experience depression or anxiety at any point in time--
or each 3% to 4% have depression, about 3% to 4%
have or experience anxiety disorder.
And then you can look at within a given location,
is it the case that the rich or the poor
have more symptoms of, say, depression?
And what you see here-- this is from India
for income quintiles-- and we essentially
see the lowest income quintiles, the poorest
fifth of the population, has the highest prevalence of, say,
depression in this case.
That's also true for anxiety.
That's also true for suicide.
They tend to negatively correlate with income as well
as with employment.
And so broadly, the poor are about 1.5 to three times
more likely to experience depression or anxiety compared
to the rich.
Of course, that varies across places, and so on.
But it's a pretty robust correlation
within a given place.
That's to say, if you go to a given place
and look at the rich versus the poor,
you will find more symptoms of depression and anxiety
among the poor compared to the rich.
Now, one thing I haven't done is to say, well,
now-- you might say, well, OK, so maybe we should just
focus on economic growth.
Let's see if [? once ?] [? countries ?] grow,
everybody will be happy, and then maybe depression, anxiety,
et cetera will go away.
In fact, that's not the case.
So the graph that I showed you from before about happiness
and self-reported well-being, that
is very much upward sloping essentially for any measures
that you can think of.
When you do the same-- and I don't have this here,
but when you do the same for depression or other types
of symptoms, in fact, you will not
find an increasing an upward sloping graph.
Anybody have any ideas of why that might be?

So if you just look at the cross-country prevalence
of, say, depression and anxiety, you
will find essentially that [? richer ?]
the slope with respect to income, if any, is flat.
If anything, it might be negative, even.

Yeah.
I think you can always compare yourself to others, no matter
where you are.
So maybe no matter which country you're
in the, the lowest income quintile
is going to have higher rates compared to the highest
quintile.
Yeah.
That's exactly right.
So here, for these types of conditions,
notice that what's in here is relative comparisons
and absolute comparisons, in some ways,
in the sense of, say, you need to satisfy a certain--
the richer you get, the more things you can buy,
the more things you can do, and so on.
You improve your absolute living conditions.
And that seems quite important for overall happiness.
A second component is relative comparison within countries.
And so that might also affect people's happiness.
So mixed in here is also changes in inequality--
richer countries more unequal than poorer countries.
But it seems like that doesn't seem to matter so much here.
When you look at depression and anxiety,
however, what might be really quite
important is not so much just the levels, but also
the relative levels.
So if you're poor, or relatively poor
compared to others in society as we show here,
then that seems to be quite damaging
for people's mental health.
If you're absolutely poor, in a sense of just
don't have money, that might also be important, but perhaps
somewhat less important compared to these relative comparisons.
Any other ideas why this slope might not
show up across countries?

This is getting back to what Evan was saying earlier.
It is about measurement.
So you might say, well, measuring
depression and anxiety across place
is very different than the way people report
certain conditions, et cetera.
Or the way they're measured, even if it's translated
properly, might be hard.
And so there might be measurement issues.
We don't think it's just measurement issues,
but I think there's also some issues about trying
to measure this very well.
PROFESSOR: So now these are all correlations.
OK, I'm showing you essentially people's correlation
between people's income and their well-being in some ways.
Now, what about causal effects?
Now, of course, and you have seen all this already,
there's a bunch of causal evidence coming from RCTs,
essentially from cash transfer programs.
And you have seen the give directly
studies several times throughout the class.
If you sort of look at it, it turns out
there's many, many cash transfer RCTs.
Some of them are--
many of them are unconditional cash transfers, where
the government or an NGO or place just says, here's money.
You can do with it whatever you want.
And there's no strings attached at all.
That's what the give directly RCT is.
But then there's also a bunch of other studies
that are conditional cash transfers,
things like if your kid goes to school,
you get money for example, or things like that.
I think these are mostly unconditional cash transfers.
What essentially you find is that there's
very robust evidence on short-run improvements
in well-being.
So here, you see years since the cash transfer began.
And you essentially see a treatment effect
as in standard deviations of subjective well-being,
as well as mental health outcomes.
And essentially, you see that people are--
generally, these dots, these are--
each dot is like one estimate from one study.
What essentially you see that these dots are generally
above zero, it's about 0.1 standard deviation effect.
So essentially, giving people money makes them happier.
There's some evidence you can sort of
see this is sort of downward sloping in some ways.
There's some evidence that these effects
sort of attenuate over time.
So if you give people some money and come back
the next day, or next month, or next year,
people are going to be a lot happier than before.
But if you come back five years later, some of these effects
are less pronounced than before.
And then there's some evidence that larger transfers
make people happier as perhaps you might expect.
Similarly, there's also some evidence, for example,
and I think--
I forgot who was talking about stress.
That, for example, cortisol levels
are lower among people who received cash transfers
compared to people who did not.
And that's some measure at least of people
are less stressed than before, which again,
is like a measure of well-being.
Does this make sense?
OK, now, so this is about causal effects of money or poverty
on people's well-being.
Now, in particular, when it comes to mental distress
or anxiety and depression, there might
be effects in both directions.
So poverty might affect people's anxiety and depression.
But at the same time, there might be effects feeding back
in the other direction.
So we talked about how might poverty worsen mental health.
We talked about most of these already.
People might be a lot more worried, and anxious,
and so on.
They might have low physical health.
They might not be able to leave their house.
They might just not be able--
might just not do well in terms of being
able to walk and so on.
We talked not so much about this,
but there's also early life conditions.
For example, if you're very poor growing up,
there's some evidence that leads to symptoms
of depression and anxiety later in life among people.
Exposure to violence and crime is higher among the poor.
Social status is lower, and so on.
So there's lots of reasons why poverty
might be bad for people's mental health among these.
We already talked about that quite a bit.
And then but on the other hand, there
might be also effects in the other direction.
Mental distress can have lots of economic consequences.
We're going to talk a little bit about-- not about depression
and anxiety, but more worries about money
and the effects of worries about money on productivity.
You might also think people's beliefs
about what they can achieve might be different.
You might think that people might
make very different decisions.
Women are disproportionately affected
by depression and anxiety.
So depression and anxiety might also disproportionately affect
women, and therefore, female empowerment.
You might also think that if parents are depressed,
that's bad for investment in children,
and human capital, education, and so on.
So there's lots of reasons to believe that there's
an effect in both direction from poverty to mental health
and from mental health back to poverty.

And this effect might potentially
reinforce each other.
Any questions?
OK, so then, what evidence do we actually have?
And this is similar to what I just showed you before.
So I showed you here, these are essentially
cash transfer programs.
This is like a mixture of subjective well-being
and mental health.
Here, I'm showing you mostly mental health outcomes.
And what you see essentially, this
is sort of a plot that's sort of a meta-analysis,
as people call it, which is a plot that
shows treatment effect across a lot of different studies.
And broadly, what you see essentially
is that both multifaceted anti-poverty programs,
it's essentially the ultra poor program with similar types
of program, have positive effects
on people's mental health.
Similarly, cash transfer programs
have positive effects on people's mental health.
The effects are about something like 0.1 standard deviations.
So essentially, giving people money or supporting them
in some ways improves their mental health,
be that through cash or ultra poor programs.
Yes?
STUDENT: Are there studies the other way?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so I'm going to show you this.
That's coming next.
So that's more like--
so I sort of characterize this direction here
is very robust in the sense that you say, if people are poor,
A in the cross section, you'll find
they have more depression, anxiety, et cetera.
And then reducing poverty or anti-poverty programs
improve people's mental health.
We don't know exactly what the channels are necessarily.
For example, there's some evidence of, say,
providing people in the US, in fact,
a colleague, Amy Finkelstein, has a paper
with coauthors on the Oregon Health Insurance
essentially where randomly people were given health
insurance and others were not.
And that also led to lower levels of depression.
Which is to say maybe here people's worries or anxiety
about uncertainty in their lives was reduced.
And therefore, people are less depressed.
So there's quite a bit of evidence
of the overall effects.
Essentially just if you do economic interventions that
improves people's well-being, we don't necessarily
know exactly why and how or what's
the most effective way of doing that.
Now, what about the other direction?
So here, we have quite a bit of evidence
that in particular, non-specialist therapy
works quite well.
What I mean by non-specialist therapy, so we know quite--
there's quite a bit of evidence that
cognitive behavioral therapy, essentially just talk therapy,
is highly effective in reducing people's depression
and anxiety.
So if you go to a therapist for a full session of CBT,
which cognitive behavioral therapy, which
would be something like 10 to 12 sessions,
that has, on average, pretty large and beneficial effects
on people's depression.
So just getting therapy improves people's mental health.
Now, one issue in low income contexts
is that trained therapists are often not available at scale.
That's to say you find much fewer qualified people to treat
people's depression directly.
And so what instead has been developed,
and this is our coauthor--
Vikram Patel and coauthors have done
what's called the Healthy Activity Program, which
essentially is a non-specialist therapy where
people in the village, like community health workers,
but also other peers in the village
are trained for like a couple of months
to essentially deliver sort of simplified forms of therapy
that are extremely inexpensive.
They cost something like $70 per person.
And you find there's clear effects on depression.
This is a year later, there's clear reductions
in people's depression.
This is depression symptoms in the treatment
group versus the control group.
And there's also some evidence on days
unable to work or things like healthcare costs.
So people are able to work, or report at least that they
work more days.
They also report that they have lower health costs.
Now, that's not quite the same as lower poverty.
So this is some survey questions that say, well, people
are able to work more.
These tend to be sort of public health studies.
There's a very active literature that now tries to look at--
now, if you provide people with other forms of therapy,
are they, in fact--
can we find some economic benefits of that?
There's some evidence here on-- in particular,
on female empowerment and childhood development.
So there are some studies that show
that if you treat depression among pregnant women, six,
seven years later, A, these women are still less depressed
compared to the control group.
B, they have higher levels of female empowerment.
So they make more decisions in the household.
And C, there's higher levels of investment in human capital
among children.
Children go to better schools.
They have better tools for homework and so on.
Presumably, because women have more decision
making power in the household.
And they tend to allocate more resources to their children
compared to men.
So there's some evidence that shows that.
There's less evidence directly on the effect
of therapy on say, productivity on labor supply, and so on.
There's some of evidence on labor supply.
But I think the verdict is still out on that.

OK, so here, so what the authors argue here is to say, well,
people have worked more days.
And they also have reduced their healthcare costs.
So in fact, given that the intervention is quite cheap,
it's essentially pays for itself within a few months.
Now, we have some work looking at the long-lasting effects.
Here, essentially, what you see is
that this is the fraction depressed in the treatment
or control group.
What you see is-- this is what I showed you before,
there's large differences between treatment and control
at something like three months, also at 12 months.
And these effects tend to persist for a long, long time.
So five years later, if you go to people,
which is what we did in Goa in India, if you go back
to people five years later, you still
find lower levels of depression in the treatment group
compared to the control group.
And now, if you look at this area between the two groups,
this is the number of months of depression averted
in treatment versus control.
And you find essentially this is highly cost effective
in the sense that it costs about $7
per month of depression averted, which is-- depression
is very, very severe in terms of affecting people's well-being.
So if it costs $7 to avert that for a month,
that's a pretty amazing sort of investment opportunity.

Let me stop here for a second and sort of summarize.
So what I've been showing you so far
is that the poor report lower subjective well-being
and happiness compared to the rich.
This correlation reflects causal effect.
In particular, anti-poverty programs
increase subjective well-being and mental health.
Therapy, on the other hand, has long-lasting mental health
benefits.
There is also some evidence at least of economic benefits.
I think there's more work to be done
to figure out what exactly these benefits are
and how lasting they are.
We're going to next look at is whether worries about money
lower worker productivity.
So far, what I showed you here and summarized what we just
discussed is more about anxiety and depression, which are
sort of more severe conditions.
Worries about money is essentially
every person-- or almost every person
who is relatively poor will have worries about money
at least at some point in time.
We're going to now look at are these worries about money,
do they have causal effects on people's productivity.
PROFESSOR: So this is joint work with a [INAUDIBLE]..
This is a study in rural India, where
we try to look at are these financial concerns--
is worrying about money, does this
get in the way of being productive at work?
And so what we consider here is financial strain,
we call it, which is periods of cash shortfalls.
So as you already learned a lot about in class
is that being poor doesn't just mean that the levels of income
are low, but it also means often there's
a lot of variance and lots of shocks.
There's lots of unexpected shocks,
which is, say, health shocks or the harvest is bad and so on.
But there's also a lot of predictable cycles.
This is the end of the month, so before harvest,
which is, essentially, say, when people run out of money
at the end of the month, so the end of a harvest cycle.
So when you harvest as a farmer, in particular
when you have cash crops, after the harvest,
you get a bunch of cash from selling your crops.
And then you have to use that money for about a year
or even longer to live on.
So at the end of this harvest cycle before the next harvest,
people are going to be relatively poor.
At the beginning of the harvest cycle
or after the harvest has actually been done,
people tend to be relatively rich.
And so we know that essentially there's
predictable changes in financial strain, both
for unexpected shocks, but also for expected variation.
So for example, if you look in the US
at people who are on food stamps,
you will see that they eat a lot more calories at the beginning
of the month compared to the end of the month
because they run out of money at the end of the month.
That's also true if you look at farmers.
At the beginning of the harvest season,
once they have just harvested, they're relatively rich.
At the end of it, they're relatively poor.

Then this financial strain entails mental costs, even when
expected income is coming.
So for example, if you look in the US,
the fraction who feels financially insecure
drops by 53% at the beginning of the month.
So these are people who often--
they know exactly at the beginning of the month,
they're going to get either food stamps or other types
of benefits.
They know that's going to happen,
yet once they receive the money, their financial insecurity
falls by quite a lot.
And so if you have been--
I think today is the last of the month.
So if you receive some regular money from somewhere,
you might be able to sympathize in the sense
that once you receive money, once money is in your bank
account, you feel a lot better than
before because now you can spend it.
You're flush with money and relatively rich compared
to the day before or days before when you're relatively poor.
In India in our setting, about 86% of people in our sample
feel worried about their finances
in the annual lean season.
What's the lean season?
The lean season is when people essentially
don't have much to do because essentially people have already
planted.
And now, they're sort of waiting for the harvest.
And there's just not much to do.
So there's not much agricultural work.
But there's also not much other jobs that you could do.
And so now, there's a literature that
looks at the cognitive consequences of poverty
and financial strain.
There's some papers that show impacts
on lab measures of cognition.
That's to say if you look at people before harvest
compared to after harvest, there's
some evidence that shows that people essentially
have higher levels of cognition before harvest
compared to after harvest.
Now, what we're going to try and ask
is whether these forces have economically important effect.
Is it, in fact, the case that if we reduce
people's financial strain, would workers become more productive?
And so what we're going to try and look at
is in particular worker productivity.
Why do we look at worker productivity?
Well, because labor income is sort of
depends crucially on worker productivity.
If you work somewhere, if you're more productive,
you're going to earn more money and particularly in places
when you're paid piece rates.
So we're going to look at whether relieving people's
financial stress makes a person more productive at work.
This is a field experiment with 408 manufacturing workers
in rural India.
What we're going to do is to alleviate financial constraints
in an experiment, we're going to vary the timing of income
and then look at productivity, as well as some measures
of people's attention.
So we're going to look at is attention really something that
changes as people are working?
Now, how do we do that?
We have a sample of workers in rural [INAUDIBLE]..
They are in the lean season, meaning
they have very little work to do in agriculture, but also
in manufacturing.
They have something like seven, eight days
of work in the past month.
And they get these intermittent short term contract jobs.
They're paid about $3 or $4 per day.
That's often people's family income.
Now, what is the work task?
The work task is to make these disposable plates
for restaurants that look something like this.
I also try to do these myself.
My plates did not look like this.
So what do you have to do is you have to use these leaves.
And you see these small sticks here made out of wood,
and you have to sort of stitch them together
into round plates.
These are used in restaurants for curries
or other types of things.
So you really don't want to have any holes in your leaf plates.
And so the leaf plates have to be round.
They have to be a certain size.
And they also can't have any holes as well.
And so that's kind of a relatively attention heavy task
that we chose, in part because we're interested in if people
are really distracted because they worry about money,
are they now doing worse at this job?
People are incentivized to get a piece rate per production.
What does this mean?
Essentially, it means the more of these leaf plates
you make complete that are sort of satisfying quality
standards, the more money you earn.
This is we hire people for two weeks.
And during those two weeks, essentially,
the experiment or the work at our experimental site
is people's primary source of income at the time
and the bulk of their monthly earning.
They don't have much other work to do.
And so now they get this job.
That's a good job for them for two weeks.
And they don't have much else to do.
So people are highly motivated.
Stakes are pretty high.
People want to be productive.
Now, you might say, well, are people
really worried about money?
When you ask people about do you have outstanding loans,
lots of people have outstanding loans.
If you ask people can you come up
with about 1,000 rupees for an emergency quickly,
most people say it's very hard for them to do so.
1,000 rupees is about, I think at the time, maybe something
like $15 or the like.
So people really are very cash constrained.
They have lots of loans.
And they also are not really able to deal with shocks
easily.
When you ask them, well, what are you worried about?
They say, well, I worry about daily expenses,
about loans, health issues.
Sometimes marriage of daughters in particular
comes up because it's very expensive, but also
debt and other types of expenses that people
are concerned about.
Now, people, when you ask them, how worried are you,
lots of people say they're really worried.
About 70% say they're very worried about money.
And importantly, people also seem
to bring these worries with them to work.
So if you ask them on a randomly-- on one day,
we essentially ask people at the end of the workday, what
did you think about doing work, about 70%
say they thought about the work task, which is good.
That's what you're supposed to do.
But about 50%, In fact, say they worry about their finances
here.
And that's a pretty high number, considering that they're not
really-- it's not like thinking about work, about your finances
at work, helps you doing the work you're doing, if anything,
of course, it distracts you.
So now what we're going to do is we're
going to vary the timing of when workers receive
their expected wage payments.
So we're going to have some workers who
receive a cash infusion of liquidity and others have not.
Notice that we're not changing any incentives to work.
So people's overall wealth is going
to stay the same, as well as their piece rate
incentives that they receive.
Now, you might say, well, why should this do anything,
despite-- everybody knows that they're going to be paid.
Everybody is going to pay overall roughly the same.
So why should this make a difference?
Well, people can pay for urgent expenses.
They can reduced order debt that they have.
They also might feel less vulnerable to shocks
and the like.
They might just have a bunch of money in their pocket,
and they might feel richer because of that.
So here's what the experiment looks like.
There's a treatment group and the control group,
treatment group down here, control group up there.
Everybody works for 12 days, consecutive days
in the experiment.
Everybody is paid on day one because we
wanted to have a first payment to get people to essentially
trust us and think this is the work
site that actually pays people.
The control group is then paid on day 12
for all of their remaining work that they have done.
The treatment group instead is paid on day eight
for their work until then.
They are paid essentially for their work on day two
to day seven.
They're paid on day eight.
So they're getting a bunch of cash.
Now, that's quite a bit of cash because remember,
people don't have a lot of work anyway.
And that's a pretty well paid job.
So the treatment group gets a bunch of cash here.
And now what we can do is we can look
at what we call the post-pay period,
we can look at the treatment group versus the control group.
Treatment group has been paid a lot.
Control group has not been paid a lot.
And we can look at people's productivity.
Notice that we can also look at at the beginning of the study,
everybody is exactly the same.
We only tell people on day five whether you're paid
on day eight versus on day 12.
And so now we can look at, we can compare people
before the payment period, before in the first few days.
This is a randomized control trial.
We can look for are these two groups the same?
And they should be the same because on average
because we randomized.
Then we can measure announcement effect.
When I announce you that you're going
to be paid earlier than expected,
are you going to be more productive?
And then crucially, are we going to look
at the post-payment period, when we look at
are people more productive now they have more cash in hand?
PROFESSOR: So now, what do we find?
So first we find that people spend quite a bit of money,
right after they receive the money, on loan repayments
and on household expenditures.
So people pay quite a bit of money to loans and credits
to pay back their loans that they have already.
That's a huge increase relative to the control group.
The control group pays about 94 rupees overall.
[? Back ?] in the treatment group
pays an additional 275 rupees back.
So people get about 1,400 rupees in payment.
They spend about 94 plus 75 on repayment.
So they pay quite a bit of money back.
They also spend quite a bit of money on stuff
like clothes, food, household expenditures,
household necessities.
So essentially what happens is, people get more money.
They use some of that money to pay back debt.
They use some of that money to pay for household expenditures.
And they have some of that money that
is just to have cash on hand to have it
in case any shocks happen to them going forward.
Does that make sense?
So next we asked people an open-ended question that I
already showed you before.
We asked on one day, what do you think about while working?
We have in the control group people
who say they're focused on the work task.
This is on a specific day.
And then we have people who did not think
about their financial worries.
It's sort of a double negative, in some sense.
So what we find is that people are
more likely to be focused on the work task.
So people are more likely to say, in the treatment group,
I've been thinking about work during the day.
And they're also more likely to not think
about their financial worries.
That's to say, they're less likely to think
about their financial worries.
So essentially what we find is that the cash infusion
increases people's focus on the work task,
and reduces their thoughts about finances.

So next we're going to look at do workers actually
become more productive?
And you can see this best perhaps here.
You see here, this is a baseline.
This is before the payments happen.
You see the two groups are the same.
You see here this is a treatment effects for lower
wealth and higher wealth.
And essentially you see the treatment effects
before the payment period are zero.
And then what you see is that people who have lower wealth
to start with in our experiment, they
become a lot more productive immediately after the payment.
So they receive the payment on day 8.
On day 9, they show up and they're
more productive in the morning.
And that higher productivity remains throughout the end
of the study.
So essentially, workers who have been paid
more, they have more cash on hand,
they become more productive over time.
Does that sense?
So how large is this effect?
It's about 6% to 13% increase in hourly productivity.
And the strongest effects among the poorest workers
in our sample, presumably because the cash infusion
is most meaningful for them.
If you're relatively rich in the sample,
and rather receive another 1,000 earlier or later,
it doesn't really matter so much.
But if you're quite poor, receiving 1,400 rupees
is a lot of money.
So people are much less worried about their finances,
and therefore become more productive at work.
Now, this is about overall productivity.
How much do you produce?
Now in addition, we look at how are
people producing their output?
I told you already how to make a leaf plate.
Essentially you have to form a circle.
There can be no holes or gaps.
Leaf plates must not be visible.
Each leaf is in a regular shape.
So it's easy to make mistakes, it's
easy to make a plate that's not round,
it's easy to go in the wrong direction, and so on.
And as I said, I did a lot of mistakes.
This is not my leaf plate, unfortunately.
And so now we can measure that in people's output.
We collected everybody's output and measured
how many stitches people make.
So if you use a lot of leaves--
look at this.
This takes something like 10 to 12 leaves.
It's a leaf plate, how it's supposed to look like.
My leaf plates would have something like 20 leaves,
because I had lots of holes.
You have to fix the hole.
And then you go in the wrong direction,
and it's way too big, and so on and so forth.
That, of course, takes you a lot more effort and time.
And you're only paid for completed leaf plates.
So if you're inattentive, you don't know what you're doing,
or you're distracted, you might use a lot more leaves
or stitches.
Or if you don't stitch it properly,
you have to stitch three times.
And so you have to undo mistakes and that takes you a lot more
time and effort for the same piece rate.
So [? have ?] these measures of attentiveness in production,
which is the number of double holes
where if you undo a stitch, or you stitch somewhere and then
undid the stitch.
The number of leaves, if you make lots of leaves,
the number of stitches are a measure
of quality of production-- how attentive are you
while producing.
When you look at that, we find, similar to what I showed you
before, that being paid increases not only people's
overall production, but also the measures of attentiveness.
So people become not only faster at working and producing more,
their attentiveness of work also goes up.
I should have told you here, we are measuring these outcomes
unbeknownst to workers.
So we essentially just collect the output
and then measure and rate the quality of the output.
So it's not that workers know necessarily
that we're going to measure this and try to improve that.
Instead, it seems to be that subconsciously workers don't
seem to necessarily notice that they're
producing higher quality.
It's just once your mental burden is reduced,
people produce better quality, higher attentive work.

I showed you this already.
This is essentially consistent with several psychological
mechanisms, such as worry, stress, sadness, and so on.
We think that worries is quite important, because I showed you
some evidence that people seem to actually report
they worry less, they think less about money.
But it could also be other things like stress and sadness
that we don't necessarily measure.
These attentiveness effects persist
until the end of the contract.
Let me mostly skip this.
We don't think it's about things like fairness concerns.
You think you're paid earlier than somebody else,
and maybe the other person is really mad at the employer.
Or the employer, because we pay them later,
and therefore they didn't work very well.
We spent quite a bit of time trying to figure out,
or trying to address these concerns.
We don't think it's about the relationship
between the employer and the worker,
but rather we think that workers just
reduce their mental burdens.
And once mental burdens are reduced,
workers become more productive.
We also don't think it's about nutrition.
Remember I showed you that once people receive more money,
they actually spend that money on nutrition, at least
in part, on food.

In the short-run, for example, we
didn't find any differences in people's breakfast consumption.
So people are essentially pretty much eat
the same breakfast every day.
There doesn't seem to be any difference between treatment
and control.
We also don't find any differences
in the morning versus the afternoon throughout
the workday.
So we don't think nutrition is the main thing that's
going on here.
So let me briefly conclude this study.
And then we're going to take a break
to talk about sleep before everybody falls asleep
until I get there.
So what do we find, or what have I shown you here?
So being able to pay expenses at home-- so people get money,
they have more money now available--
boosts workers' productivity and attentiveness at work.
That's to say that financial strain
itself might be detrimental for productivity and earning.
That's to say when you look at times when workers might need
money the most, when you have a financial shock
or when you're not doing well financially,
or perhaps when somebody gets laid off,
they really want to be productive in making
more money somehow.
But precisely at that time when people need the money the most,
financial strain hurts worker productivity.
Notice this is not a policy evaluation.
We're not really advocating for a policy of paying people
weekly, or daily, or whatever.
This is just to say it's a proof of concept
that productivity effects occur in high stakes setting that
affect people's labor income.
That's to say this is a setting where workers' income crucially
depends on how productive they are.
And when you relax people's, reduce
people's financial concern, they do become more productive.
Now, what are the implications of that?
Well, one is, when you think about social programs,
often there's this myth or this concern
about if you give people money who are poor,
are they just going to stop working, or working less?
There is some evidence that, in fact, in Abhijit and others
have some papers on showing that that's not the case-- at least
in low income contexts.
And, in fact, we find there might
be even some benefits of people are
able to produce more and more productive, potentially,
once they have more money.
So in fact, not only might there be
not a lot of important negative effects on labor supply,
in fact, people's productivity might go up.
Second, firms might want to support
workers' financial well-being.
You might say a firm might want to just provide
people with insurance, or savings programs,
or other types of programs where they essentially can improve
their financial well-being.
And that might be good, not just because the firm
might care about their workers in some ways.
But, in fact, it might make the workers more productive
directly.
Again, notice our study is not an evaluation
of an optimal pay frequency.
The reason being that the control group receives money
at the end, and then we stop the study.
But maybe on the day after, the control group
would have been more productive, because now they
receive a bunch of cash and the treatment group already
spent that.
But I think what one can take away
from this is that there are at least potential productivity
effects of programs that support workers' financial well-being.
Let me see, were there any questions on this?
Yeah?
STUDENT: mentioned it in your comment earlier,
but I was just curious to know whether anyone
has looked at how aware people are
of these effects on themselves.
Just for example, you mentioned it with the [INAUDIBLE]..
And it seems to be they intuitively work better.
But if one asked them at the end do
you feel better, or do you feel like you work better,
are you more--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, we have not asked that question directly.
We have one piece of evidence, which is the following.
We have a separate small experiment
where we changed the piece rate of how much people
are paid per plate.
So sometimes we doubled the piece rate.
You just get twice as much per plate that you produce,
and sometimes not.
And we look at the effects on people and holding
constant their overall payments.
And we look at the impact of that on productivity
and on attention.
So if you thought people are quite aware of this
and say that they can control their attention in some ways
and say attention is the way to become more productive,
you would think that if I pay you twice as much,
now you're going to become more attentive.
You're going to also put in more effort,
and then try to produce more.
That's not what we find.
We find some effects of increased productivity.
So people become a little bit more productive, but actually
not very much.
And attentiveness, or the measures
we have of attentiveness, don't change at all.
That sort of suggests that attentiveness is not really
under workers' control.
In the sense that it's not really that you can say
I want to be more attentive, and then increase my productivity
in some ways.
But instead, it seems to be that the effects that we find
relax people's financial concerns.
And then they feel better.
They become more attentive almost automatically,
if you want.
Now, you're asking something slightly different.
Which is about, if you ask people, would they say,
well, I felt a lot better and somehow it was easier to work.
STUDENT: If you tell them you work much better,
what do you think it is?
Could they pinpoint, I think--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's a great question.
So that's not something economists
do that much in studies, but I think they should do it more.
We haven't asked these questions,
in part because we had rolling enrollment.
Meaning we had 30 people in the study at a time,
and another 30, another 30, and so on.
So you want to minimize spillovers
to other participants later.
That's not to say we couldn't have
come back later and done that, but we don't have any of that.
But I think it's a great question.
Actually, now that I think of it,
there's another study by Josh Dean, a former student of mine,
who looks at the effects of noise on productivity--
so noise pollution.
And what he finds is that there's
reasonably large effects of being exposed to noise--
louder places compared to less loud places--
on productivity.
So workers are more productive, they're
also more attentive in terms of measures of cognition
when they are working quiet compared
to when they work under noise.
But then you ask them what their willingness to pay
is to work under quiet versus noisy condition,
and their willingness to pay essentially
is close to zero for that.
Which sort of suggests that there
are some issues about comprehension
of these types of questions.
But that at least suggests that workers are not
necessarily aware of that noise affects how productive they are
in the setting, even though if they were more productive
they would earn a lot more money.

PROFESSOR: So let me continue.
Now, you might say, and we talked about this a little bit
already, that one psychological effect of poverty
is worries about money, as well as anxiety and depression.
But there's lots of other things potentially going on.
There's sleep deprivation.
People might worry a lot about money and therefore--
or other things in their lives-- and therefore might not
be able to sleep, as well as their sleeping conditions might
just be very adverse.
People might be quite stressed.
We talked about physical pain a bit
already, noise, environmental pollution, heat, stigma,
social exclusion, dignity, substance abuse,
mental distress, self esteem, et cetera.
There might be lots of other things, other ways
other than worries about money in which-- that
might have call them psychological effects
in some ways.
I think of this as effects that might make it difficult
for you to concentrate or to pay attention and so on.
One of the things that we have studied recently in India
is sleep deprivation.
This is a paper with Pedro Bessone and Gautam Rao, Heather
Schofield, and Mattie Toma.
Now, so what do we actually know about the effects of sleep?
So sleep-- we spend a lot of time sleeping,
MIT undergrads less so.
But, in general, people spend a lot
of time sleeping in their lives.
Expert-- and this is perhaps important for you to know.
Experts recommend 7 to 9 hours of sleep per night.
Any of you get 7 to 9 hours of sleep currently?
Oh, more than I would have thought.
I guess it's not finals season yet.
So about a third of US adults report sleeping
six or fewer hours per night.
And so there's lots of lab experiments
and observational studies that show impacts of sleep
on-- or sleep deprivation on cognition, health, happiness,
a little bit on wages, a little bit on decision making,
some work on test scores.
For example, if you look at-- and this is,
I think, mostly on high schools.
If you change, for example, the start time
in a high school from 7:00 AM to 8:00 AM,
test scores tend to go up, the reason being
that people go to bed at a fixed time, usually.
And if school starts at 8:00 instead of at 7:00,
kids essentially get more sleep.
If kids get more sleep, they do better in school.
Nearly all of this evidence is from rich countries.
A lot of it is also lab experimental evidence.
What does this mean?
This is like a sleep lab where you--
in a sleep laboratory where you go inside, you're wired,
you spend three, four days in the actual sleep lab.
Your brain is wired in various ways.
You sleep in the sleep lab for several days.
There's often a treatment group and a control group.
Treatment group sleeps very few hours-- sometimes
doesn't sleep at all.
Control group sleeps as usual, or at least as usual
as you can sleep in a sleep lab.
And then, usually, people look at effects
on cognitions and the like.
There's very little field evidence,
in the sense of evidence of long-run interventions
where people sleep in their own homes.
And now if you look at-- if you read books about sleep,
for example, Matthew Walker's book on why we sleep,
you get the impression that, if we just slept a little more,
the world would be a much better place.
Health care burden would plummet.
Mental health would get better.
Businesses would be more productive.
People would be healthier.
Roads would be safer.
Children would be smarter.
Everything would be great.
And so there's very much this notion
that people under-invest in sleep.
And if we could just get people to sleep more,
that would be great.
Notice that that's all based on evidence from rich countries.
That may or may not be true.
I'm going to show you some evidence from India that's
potentially quite different.
But when you read the evidence from rich countries,
you get the impression that sleep is really important
and there's a sleep deprivation epidemic, If you want.
And if we could only get people to sleep more,
things would get a lot better.
Now, one thing that becomes very apparent
if you look at websites such as Gapminder or Dollar
Street, which I think you remember from, I think, case 1
or from one of the first lectures--
when you look at people's conditions,
and I encourage you to actually do
that-- if you look at people's homes,
in particular, sleeping conditions, the beds and so on,
you see hugely different environments
of people's places.
You see, essentially-- this is here the Howard family
in Colorado earning--
this is, I think, family income about $4,650 per month.
So I think this is four or five people.
They have really nice curtains, really nice mattress,
pillows, plush, and so on.
And it seems very comfortable.
And one would be very tempted to take a nap right now,
especially at 2:00 PM in the afternoon.
Instead, you see here the Shah family,
which usually is people's living room as well as their bedroom,
where many people sleep in the same room.
People sleep on the floor.
There's dust, noise, mosquitoes-- many different
sort of factors that interfere with people's sleep.
So people's sleeping conditions are
dramatically different among the rich compared to the poor.
And that raises two key questions.
One question is-- well, now, A, do people actually just sleep
less and worse in some ways?
So is sleep among the poor worse compared
to sleep among the rich?
And, two, if we could increase people's sleep in some ways,
would that have returns or important effects
on people's lives?
And, in particular, you might say,
well, Matthew Walker would say, well, increasing sleep
for anybody is just amazing.
Now, it might be that that's true for the US.
But perhaps it's not the case if your sleep environment
looks like this.
If your sleep is really disrupted and so on,
perhaps then increasing your sleep
might actually not have very high returns.
And this is what we were trying to do.
We're trying to do three things.
We're trying to, first, objectively
measure people's sleep quantity and quality in Chennai.
This is a city in India.
Then we wanted to look at interventions
to increase people's sleep, as well as measure
the impact of these interventions,
then, on people's outcomes.
So what we were doing is we--
first, we tried to document people's sleep deprivation
and find alarmingly low quality of sleep.
What does this look like?
So you might have an Apple Watch or other types of Fitbits
or the like that essentially track your sleep over time.
So the way this works is-- essentially,
you have some wristband type of watch
that measures sleep through your motion.
And what you get is some pictures
that look something like this where you see-- this
is your entire time in bed.
This person went to bed at something like 11:00 PM,
got up at something like 7:00 or 8:00 AM.
So it wasn't bad, in this case--
I guess seven hours and 53 minutes.
You see in gray people's sleep time.
This is the time asleep.
Any minutes in gray are minutes where the person--
the sleep watch thinks that you're asleep.
And in red you see awake times.
This is-- if you have an Apple Watch or the like,
this is what your sleep might look like in the US,
something like--
and then there's a measure here--
what's called sleep efficiency.
This is the fraction of time that somebody spends in bed
that they're actually asleep.
Were we actually sleeping, as opposed to being in bed awake?
Often, there's some sleep latency period here.
When people go to bed at first, of course
they don't fall asleep immediately.
But once they're actually trying to sleep,
people still wake up sometimes.
Often, they wake up for a little bit.
Sometimes they don't even necessarily
notice or remember that.
Sometimes people get up and use the bathroom or so.
But this is a typical night for a typical person,
say in the US.
This is, in fact, a very unusually good night
in our sample.
This is about the 99th percentile.
So this is-- the top sleeper in our study sleeps like this.
But this is-- for comparison, this
is what your night's sleep roughly
might look like if you're a good sleeper.
Notice this person has nine awakenings.
And the longest sleep episode, uninterrupted sleep episode,
is 202 minutes.
Now, the typical night in Chennai among participants
looks something like this.
So here you see this person also spent about seven hours, 45
minutes in bed.
This is one particular person for one particular night.
And you see, essentially, the night
is riddled with awakenings.
The person wakes up all the time.
The longest-- so there's 31 awakenings
of at least one minute, so 31 different bars here.
Red bar is-- the longest uninterrupted sleep episode
is about 45 minutes.
That's about here.
Compare that to this type of person, who gets about--
some sleep streaks of about at least three hours overall.
Given that we think one sleep cycle takes something
like, I think, 90 to 120 minutes,
this person has essentially no uninterrupted sleep cycle
at all.
In particular, the person also unlikely--
we are not very good at measuring sleep quality,
but quite likely this person also
doesn't get a lot of deep sleep, just because this person wakes
up a lot.
So here's 31 awakenings, lots of awakenings.
Particularly, sleep efficiency is about 69%.
That's way, way lower than what you would find in the US.
In the US, you would find something
like sleep efficiency of 90% is normal.
Anything below 85%-- if you went to a sleep doctor,
that person would tell you you have a sleeping problem.
We need to fix it somehow.
This here is the typical person in a typical night in Chennai.
Now, what are these people?
Who are these people that are in our sample?
These are essentially lower middle class participants
that we hired for an office job to work on a data entry job
for about a month.
So these are not the poorest of the poor.
These are not people who sleep on the street.
These are people who are relatively poor.
They have reasonably good levels of education.
But they live in relatively poor living arrangements,
often with four or five people in the same room, and so on.
Here's another way to put this.
So the actigraph-- this is the measure--
that's the sleep watch that measures people's sleep.
You see here, essentially, sleep time--
these are hours per night.
When you ask people's self-report--
when you just ask them how many hours did you sleep,
people would say something like seven, 7.2 hours in our study.
This is, in fact, quite similar to what you would find
in the US or in India overall.
But that's self-reported.
That's what people say.
Now, notice that when you ask people how much did you sleep,
people often don't remember how often they woke up.
And often they confuse time in bed and time asleep.
Really, what we're interested in is time asleep,
not how much time did you spend in bed.
So when you look at the objectively measured sleep,
this is now using the actigraphs.
This is the fraction of people in our sample.
Objectively measured sleep is about 5.6 hours.
So the average person sleeps about 5 and a half hours
per night.
There's lots of people here who sleep like four hours, five
hours, and so on.
Notice this is a weekly average for people in our sample.
So that means, essentially, they have some nights
that are even worse than that.
But, on average, they sleep something like four,
five hours overall.
And that's very little.
Sleep expert would say you should sleep something
like seven to nine hours.
Now, what's preventing people from sleeping well?
We have three categories of reasons.
One is environmental conditions--
mosquitoes, noise, heat, cold, light, bathroom usage,
you have somebody else in the room,
uncomfortable condition, and so on.
Then there's mental distress, worries, insomnia, bad dreams,
and so on, as well as physical distress, physical pain,
disease hunger, thirst, and so on.
There's lots of reasons here.
Now, what we were-- in our study we tried to do the following.
We tried to essentially provide people
with ways to improve their environmental conditions.
In particular, we gave them mattress, earplugs, eye shades,
table fan, blanket, and pillow to try and see-- can we
make people's environmental sleep conditions better
that help them sleep better at night.
So we provided-- so we had-- so we have a sample of people,
about 500 people, whom we recruited for a month
to work for us in data entry.
And then we have different treatment group.
There's a control group who gets no intervention.
There are some night sleep treatment groups
where people get either information that say, look,
sleep is important for you.
Doctors say you should be sleeping more.
They get these devices, as I said,
mattress, earplugs, eye shades, table fan, and so on,
as well as-- some people also get some incentives
to sleep more.
We say, if you sleep more hours, as measured by your watch,
then we're going to pay you some money to do so.
PROFESSOR: And in fact, what we find
is that these types of interventions
are helpful for increasing people's sleep.
I can show you this here.
So here you see the control group sleeping
about 5.5 hours per night.
And you see in the treatment group some people,
this is just devices plus encouragement just
to say you had earplugs, eye shades and so on.
And we encourage you to sleep more.
That increases sleep by about 20 minutes.
And if in addition, you also provide people with incentives
sleep goes up by something like 33 minutes.
OK.
So people sleep more.
That's actually pretty large effects.
This is larger, for example, than compared
to say sleeping pills and so on that
actually don't work particularly well in RCTs
as measured by sort of studies.
However, what we find is that the effects here all
are about time in bed or driven by increased time in bed,
not by increased sleep efficiency.
That is to say if you look at people's sleep efficiency,
I told you before sleep efficiency is about 70%.
There's no effect whatsoever on sleep efficiency.
What does this mean?
It means essentially that people are not getting better sleep.
The sleep looks still like this here.
There's nights looks still something like this.
What we're doing, we're adding some time here
or we're adding some time here.
But the patterns look like very similar as before.
So the sleep quality remains the same.
We increase the length of the night or the time in bed.
That increases overall sleep.
If you stay more time in bed for a given sleep
quality or efficiency, you're going to sleep more
but you're still going to wake up all the time at night.
Notice that this was not necessarily what we intended.
So we were kind of-- we were hoping for increased sleep
efficiency, it just happens to be that what we find
is that sleep efficiency does not go up.
OK.
Why is that?
Perhaps it's because people are still really worried,
people are still-- many people sleep in the same room.
Notice that we only-- we address only some
of the environmental condition but not all of them.
They might still have lots of worries or stress,
they might feel a physical pain, there's still many people
in the same room and so on.
So anybody wakes up, everybody else essentially in the room
is probably waking up.
So perhaps sleep efficiency doesn't go up
because we haven't addressed all of these conditions.
OK.
Now, notice that this is also true in the middle
of the night.
So if you look at sleep at the fraction of our sample
that's asleep say at 3:00 AM we find no difference
between treatment and control.
You might think then, well, maybe people
are just watching TV at night or whatever and so on in bed
and that's what we're picking up.
Sleep efficiency is low even like in at 4:00
AM in the middle of the night and so yeah.
So what does that mean?
Essentially it means that the entire increase in sleep
comes from more time in bed.
And that means also there's high opportunity costs
and increased sleep.
What does this mean?
Essentially it says if you want to sleep an hour or more
if your sleep efficiency is very low you have to spend quite
a bit of time in bed to do so.
It seems like people have a mix of going to bed early
or staying in bed longer, less time watching TV,
socializing, using cell phones, exercise, and so on.
OK.
So that's kind of the effects on people's sleep.
So we have a night sleep treatment
that essentially is effective in increasing people's time in bed
and therefore their sleep.
We also have a nap treatment where
essentially we offer people the opportunity
to nap at our study space.
That's sort of very nice.
There's AC, it's very comfortable.
It's like quiet and gender separated, quiet and so on.
So people take quite a bit of advantage of that
and sleep for about 13 minutes.
The nap treatment groups naps about 13 minutes per day.
OK.
So now we're going to look at what
are these treatments do on a range of outcomes,
in particular work outcomes, productivity, labor
supply, earnings, and so on.
But also a bunch of other measures
such as well-being, happiness, decision making, and so on.
You had a question?
STUDENT: Yeah, just to clarify something.
In the nap treatment, they can sleep as long as they want
or are they told look you're--
are told beforehand how much they can nap and does that or--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so we have a nap treatment group
and there's control group.
A nap, there's like a time slot that's about half an hour
where you can nap for up to half an hour.
People happen to end up napping about 13 minutes
of this half an hour, which includes some people who
don't sleep at all, some people who sleep say 20 minutes
or 15 minutes overall.
And then we compare the nap group
to people who either just taking a break
or people who are actually working through the break.
That's important because when you
sleep you can't do other stuff and there's
sort of costs of sleep and that could
be, in fact, quite important.
It turns out that when you look at work outcomes in particular
when you compare naps versus breaks,
naps look great because during the break people can't work
and naps actually improve productivity.
When you compare naps to working through the break,
naps still increase productivity but the productivity effect
is not large enough to overcome the time spent napping.
And that's kind of in some sense quite important
because essentially sleep has benefits and costs.
Sleep researchers tend to focus just on the benefits not so
much on the costs.
So now if you are like say studying
for an exam on the following day and you're totally unprepared,
if it's 10:00 PM you might say, well, sleeping well
is important because you need to be awake in the morning.
That's true.
But of course, when you're sleeping you can't study
and so there's trade offs that people have potentially.
Having said that, you should all sleep well.
OK.
So here's what we find.
So here's the effects of the night sleep intervention.
What I'm showing you here is essentially
treatment effects on the Y-axis that
are standardized in some way.
First, we look at work outcomes.
There's no positive effect on work outcomes.
If anything, there's like negative effects.
Why are there negative effects?

STUDENT: Work less.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, people spent more time in bed.
Now, that time has to come from somewhere.
They essentially either arrive at the office later
or they go back home earlier because they just
have stuff to do.
And if you spend an hour or more in bed
or about 50 minutes more in bed you
have to cut down on some activities.
It turns out that people actually
cut down on some work time.
So people are a little bit more productive,
but that's not significant.
They work less.
The output goes down a bit and their earnings also
go down a bit.
So overall, there's no positive benefits for their work.
If you look at health outcome, physical well-being
as we call it psychological well-being,
we find essentially no significant effects.
Overall, the index is essentially a 0.
We find no effects on cognition, attention,
and measures of time, risk, and social preferences,
kind of how people make decisions
over time and with others.
You can also try to aggregate this to some overall effects.
So take all of the outcomes together
and try to sort of merge them into one index.
And essentially there's like no effect overall.
I'm going to talk for a second on how to interpret this.
But the main reason why we think that's the case
is because sleep quality is quite low.
So if you have really low sleep quality
it really doesn't matter whether you sleep half an hour or more
or not because sleep is just terrible.
Our sleep quality is just terrible.
And then improving sleep quantity doesn't do very much.
In contrast, these are the effects of the naps.
First, let's look at work outcomes.
Productivity goes up by quite a bit.
It's something 2% to 3%, which is pretty high.
It's pretty hard actually to increase worker productivity
in this type of setting.
Labor supply goes down exactly for the reasons
that I just said.
Notice that this is comparing here people
to the average of the two groups.
So if you split this up for nap versus break or nap
versus working through the break, nap versus break
would look better than this because essentially there's
no negative labor supply effects.
But nap versus working through the break is bad.
So essentially people are more productive.
They spend less time working.
The output goes down a bit.
So overall, it's kind of not happening very much.
Notice that this is over the course of about a month.
So if you were able to study this longer,
if people were adjusting their labor supply in some other way.
So what essentially you find is the treatment group
naps and then spends a little bit more time at the office,
but the treatment group spends about 30 minutes
overall napping.
That's sort of their nap slot.
And then they leave the office 5, 10 minutes later.
But you could, in principle say, well, people could in fact just
leave the office half an hour later and adjust their labor
supply accordingly.
We find some evidence that over time that happens.
So perhaps if you did this experiment
for a year or something then the nap group here
would also look better, these labor supply effects
would go away.
But at least in the short run there's
clear costs in terms of how many hours people are working.
Then we find some effects on physical well-being.
People feel healthier, they miss less days at work.
And psychological well-being, people feel happier.
They're just doing better overall.
We also find effects on increased cognition.
So people are better at attention tasks,
they pay more attention to their incentives at work and so on.
You also find some effects on preferences or measures
of preferences, in particular measures of time preferences.
For example, we have a task at the study office
where people can essentially save money at the office
and get high interest rates for doing so.
When people have napped, they save more money
than when they have not napped.
So essentially, it seems to be that people
tend to be more patient and think more about the future
when they are better rested.
And when you put all these things together
we find sort of a pretty clear overall positive effect.
Napping seems to improve a range of outcomes, including
productivity, including attention, including well-being
and cognition.
PROFESSOR: So now how do we think about these effects?
Or let me just summarize what we have found.
So first, one really important fact
that we didn't quite know about the lives of the poor
is that the urban poor at least--
we don't know quite know about the rural poor.
But at least the urban poor are severely sleep deprived.
They spend about five and a half hours per night
and have really low sleep efficiency.
So not only do they not get a lot of hours of quantity
of sleep, but the sleep is also extremely interrupted
all the time.
And so we should measure this a lot more
and try to understand better how that relates to poverty.
For example, there's some recent work
by Claire Duvernoy and Maulik Jagnani
that shows that when people receive cash transfers,
household heads, for example, have improved sleep quality.
That's to say people are worried about money.
And once you give them money or cash,
their sleep quality goes up, which
suggests that at least some of what this low sleep
efficiency comes from is from people are just worried
about stuff in their life.
And if you're able to reduce their worries in some ways,
you perhaps would increase people's sleep efficiency
and potentially their well-being in some ways.
Second, you can, in fact, increase people's sleep.
We only were able to increase people's sleep quantity,
not their sleep quality.
So one really important question is now,
can we improve sleep quality potentially?
And that's really an open question
that we need to study more.
Now next, we find new effects of increasing night
sleep on a range of outcomes.
We had some expert predictions.
We had some sleep experts, some economists
who were essentially trying to predict
the effects that we would find.
Lots of people, including ourselves,
predicted there to be large positive effects
both on productivity and labor supply and so on, and earnings.
And we can clearly reject that these predictions are correct.
That's to say experts seem to overestimate the effects
of sleep in our setting.
This is also a clear contrast to what
the medical literature says-- what I showed you earlier.
Now why is that?
I think there's two potential reasons.
One reason is, as I just said, it's
because of sleep quality is really low.
So just if you add sleep quantity
to a person that has really low sleep quality,
the benefits of that are just not very high.
And we have to test interventions
to increase sleep quality to find out
whether that's really true.
The other alternative is, perhaps,
the evidence that people find in sleep lab might just not
generalize as much as, perhaps, we would have thought.
We might find in a sleep lab, if you are fully sleep deprived,
you might really make bad decisions
or might be really bad at cognitive tasks, and so on.
But maybe that doesn't necessarily
generalize to real world settings.
My interpretation is mostly the former.
We think it's really because of the low sleep quality,
but I think we need further studies to try and find that
out.
Now second, we find, in fact, no evidence
that people under-invest in sleep in their settings.
I told you earlier, it seems to be, perhaps,
look, people sleep so little, is it
really people might be underinvesting in sleep?
Maybe they're making mistakes in sleeping as little as they do.
But now we put people to sleep more by encouraging to do so.
And essentially, nothing in their lives improves.
People earn less money.
People are not happier.
People are not more productive.
People are not more attentive and so on.
People are not nicer to others, et cetera.
So there's really nothing good that comes out of that,
at least over the course of about a month, that
sort of suggests that people are right in a sense
to sleep only five hours per night given the circumstances
that they're in.
That is to say we address a set of constraints or issues
that affect their sleep in their sleep environments.
And within those constraints, within those types of family
circumstances or living conditions that people are in,
making small marginal changes to people's sleep
doesn't really do very much.
We're spending more time in bed.
Doesn't really do very much.
So what they were doing before seems, in fact, perhaps,
the right thing to do.
Of course, it could well be that in the longer run,
or if you more dramatically change
people's sleep, if you moved everybody to a nice hotel,
for example, or a very nice apartment building, et cetera,
perhaps then people would become a lot more productive.
And we don't know whether that's true.
And I think one needs to figure out.
Of course, it could also be that over the very long run,
it's really bad for your health if you only
sleep four or five hours.
And we don't really measure that at all
because we only measure things over the course of a month.
And there's lots of medical studies that show, for example,
if you sleep deprive animals, they get cancer at some point,
or much more so than if you don't.
So there's lots of scary medical literature
that suggests the long run effects of sleep deprivation
are very severe, including for things like Alzheimer,
or cognitive decline, and so on.
But that's not things that we necessarily measure here.
But I think it's still true that in people's environments
from what they can observe, if you are sitting in Chennai
and thinking about should I sleep for an hour or more,
not if people do that or as we push people to experiment
with that, it doesn't seem like people should
be sleeping more, at least from what they
can observe in their lives.
And, again, that doesn't mean that there are no longer
effects potentially of not doing so,
but that's not something that's easy to measure
for us or for people in the study.
Now at the same time, naps seem to have important impacts.
So naps have important impact on a range of outcomes.
Naps improve productivity.
They improve attention.
They improve happiness.
So if you're an employer with your workers,
you might actually very seriously consider
allowing your workers to nap, perhaps.
Or if you are an MIT undergrad who's hired,
napping might be a good idea for you.
Preferably not in class.
Why are naps having effects compared to night sleep?
Or why is it that the effects are larger here?
Well, it could be that the quality of these naps
are much higher in the sense we have a very nice sleeping
conditions in our office where people can nap.
And so it might well be that they get higher quality sleep.
And higher quality sleep has high returns.
Of course, it's also true that naps are in the afternoon
and night sleep is at night.
And so we can't really necessarily say it's quality
as opposed to timing of sleep.
Yes?
STUDENT: Yeah, I'm a little confused
why mattresses and earplugs--
why don't they increase quality?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, great question.
So I don't think we know necessarily the answer to that.
I think I have two answers to that.
One is you see here all the issues that people report
interfere with their sleep.
This is sort of the fraction of participants
in any given night who say--
these people say they didn't sleep well.
We ask them, what interfered with your sleep?
And that's what people say.
Right?
And so what we are addressing is what you see here
in blue as opposed to in gray.
You see that there's lots of stuff that's unaddressed.
There's mosquitoes.
There's too many people in the same room, worries and stress,
physical pain, et cetera.
These are still really important barriers.
And it could be that people's sleep quality is really low,
for example, because they're in pain because there are
many people in the same room.
There's lots of mosquitoes.
And we just didn't address this concern,
and so people still wake up a lot.
Second, we provide people, for example,
with earplugs, eyeshades, and so on.
Take-up of these types of devices
is not particularly high.
So we tried various different things, just
seven types of earplugs that you can try,
and can exchange them if you like them,
and so on and so forth.
You can try different mattresses and so on.
We tried very hard to give them all sorts of options,
try to explain how to use earplugs, have them practice,
and so on and so forth.
But it turns out, I think, in particular earplugs,
people just don't like using earplugs.
And it's very hard to get used to them.
Could we have done better in that?
Perhaps, but we're not able to have high take-up on that.
So I think the combination of those two things
is to say we don't address all factors that
interfere with people's sleep.
And, two, even the factors that we try to address
are not fully addressed.
Seems to explain what's going on.
And that's not to say one can't do it,
but it's to say it's not an easy policy in the sense of if you
just gave people a bunch of earplugs, eyeshades,
and mattresses, you should not expect sleep efficiency
to go up.
Does that make sense?
STUDENT: So if we were to continue
trying different things, like mosquito nets,
trying to combat all these different factors,
does it mean that there's some combination of things
we can use that would eventually increase?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
We could try various things.
We could try also provide people with mosquito nets
or other types of mosquito repellent.
You could offer people different rooms
where they can sleep in better, or maybe separately
from others.
You could provide people with some form
of money or other ways to reduce people's worries.
There's some form of therapy that you can
do to reduce people's worries.
You could also reduce their physical pain,
for example, and so on.
And you could do a combination of those things.
My guess is there's at least some scope for improving
people's sleep quality.
In some sense, we know that that's true
because rich people sleep very well, say, in the US.
And I think also in India, but we don't necessarily
know that yet.
So in a way, we know that something is--
there's got to be some way to improve people's sleep
quality overall.
Now, of course, it could be that if you had certain life
experiences, et cetera that interfered with your sleep,
it's much more difficult to do so.
And so then you might say then, well,
why do we overall increase sleep?
I think there's a lot coming from the encouragement
and the incentives.
We tell people, look, you sleep five hours.
Doctors say you should be sleeping seven to nine hours
and so on and so forth.
We incentivize some people, so people spend more time
in bed, which is easy for them to control.
It seems like they sleep quality is much
harder to control for people.
Yeah, let me quickly finish up.
OK, so if you're an employer, you
might think offering naps might be a good idea.
And naps are often crowded out by Western work schedules,
which might be quite costly.
Napping might be a really beneficial thing for you to do.
Now there's lots of open questions.
And some of them are sort of questions
that Daniel was asking, which is, more broadly,
what are the effects of sleep in other settings,
in rich countries, in rural areas, in developing countries?
Short or long-run effects.
And particularly, the crucial question
really is how to improve sleep quality in developing
countries.
There's quite a bit of evidence that
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
works quite well in rich settings.
So essentially, there's a bunch of apps or types
of interventions that essentially do
some form of therapy for sleep.
So if you have lots of worries and issues
with sleeping at night, you might want to try this out.
There's quite a bit of evidence that
shows that at least on average, that works pretty well.
You might also perhaps think about lowering
people's financial strain.
There's a recent paper-- that's what I just mentioned--
cash transfers, in fact, are able to improve people's sleep
quality in some ways.
Studying naps, more natural sleep environments,
in particular in work environments, seems important.
One thing that has been studied a lot less in particular
in low income contexts is learning or education, test
scores, and so on on students.
There's some work on this.
In particular, there's one study recently by [INAUDIBLE] et al.
These are, I think, study students in Pittsburgh that
are incentivized to sleep more.
And, in fact, their test scores go up.
So throughout the semester, they receive
incentives to spend more time to sleep more.
And the authors find that that works in a sense
that students do sleep more.
They spend less time on social media, et cetera,
and their test scores at the end or their GPA
essentially goes up as a result of that.
Now that's in the US, of course.
We know much less about low income
contexts what might happen if people were to sleep more.
One reason why I might think that that's a good idea
or why that might be potentially a good thing to try
is kids in particular or young people
in general, but particular kids, are
much better at sleeping well.
Old people don't sleep well at all.
They wake up a lot.
If you think about your grandparents
and so on, they tend to not sleep very much,
get up early, and so on because they
have trouble sleeping well.
Kids instead can sleep really, really well.
And so therefore, a lot of the factors
that interfere with people's sleep that I just showed you
might perhaps be less important for kids.
They might just be able to sleep through all
the noise and all sorts of things that are happening.
So there then, if you're able to increase people's sleep
quantity, perhaps there might be higher returns for education,
learning, and so on and so forth.
But that's just speculation.
We don't know whether that's really true.
OK, let me just summarize in one minute
what I want you to take away.
So one is the myth of the happy poor
is a myth, as I just laid out to you.
Poverty is detrimental for well-being and mental health,
and that's been shown in abundance.
In particular, anti-poverty program
robustly improved well-being and mental health.
Conversely, negative shocks.
For example, if people lose their job
or if bad stuff happens to them, bad harvests and so on
are deteriorating people's well-being
and their mental health.
That's not to say that some of these forces
might not be at play.
Maybe there is, in fact, lower levels of stress
or social comparisons and so on in villages.
That might well be true.
But, really, what's dominating in terms
of the effects on people's well-being is that being poor
is bad for your mental health and for your well-being.
Now worries about money specifically,
and maybe perhaps mental distress more broadly,
can lower worker productivity, and therefore
make it even more difficult for people
to become richer or make money.
Further, poverty entails lots of other psychological burdens
beyond worries about money.
For example, poor sleep.
There's lots of things that haven't been studied.
So, A, we haven't studied how to increase sleep quality.
And perhaps, sleep is, in fact, also
important for affecting people's productivity, or learning,
or other types of things.
But there might be also many other things going on,
for example, physical pain or other types of things,
that might be really important in reinforcing poverty perhaps.
So we need much more work to uncover
these types of causal effects and some
of these underlying mechanisms to study
the relationship between poverty, well-being,
and mental health.

True or false? It is a foregone conclusion that the poor are less happy than the rich, so there is nothing to be gained from studying this topic.

Happiness is highly correlated with income  richer countries are happier; and as countries become richer, they also become happier. Therefore, a reasonable approach to increase happiness in poor countries might be to focus on improving income for the entire country.

True or false? The same is true of depression  richer countries are less depressed, so we should focus on improving poor countries incomes to reduce depression.


In the absense of psychological effects, economic theory would suggest that during Days 812 (the Post-Pay Period), compared to the control group, the productivity of the treatment group should be



Higher because they are less stressed.

The same because the incentives are unchanged.

Lower because of the income effect.

Uncertain because they may not trust the researchers.
