PROFESSOR: This is lecture 3 of 1473.
Today, we're going to talk about the nutrition poverty drop
and whether it exists.
We're going to talk about, for a large part, of what we're
going to call the capacity curve and the idea of a poverty trap.
So we can understand what is a poverty trap.
And what are the conditions for a poverty trap to emerge?
And we're going to use this concept of the poverty
trap the same way we use the concept of RCTs
throughout the class.
So we're going to apply, then, the idea of the poverty trap
to nutrition today.
But throughout the class, we're going
to use the concept of a poverty trap
to think about all sorts of other issues as well.
Then we're going to, in the second half,
then we're going to think about, well,
is there, in fact, a nutrition poverty trap?
Is there a poverty trap posed by nutrition or people
not eating enough, or as much as they perhaps could?
We're going to first look at do the poor spend everything
on food?
Or what do actually food expenditures
look like for the poor?
And we're going to look at two directions
of a causal impact between nutrition,
between caloric intake and income.
We're going to first look at the impact
of increased income on food expenditures
and caloric intake.
That is to say as people become richer, as we increase
people's income, do people actually eat more
or how much more?
And second, we're going to look at the other direction.
We're going to look at the impact of increased
caloric intake on productivity and income.
As people eat more, do they, in fact, become more productive
and earn more money?
So first, to set the stage, I want
to go back and talk a little bit about malnutrition and famine.
And sort of to say that while severe famine may be history,
so we are not in much of history of the world
has had very severe famines across the world, that
might be a history in the sense that that's not
a common phenomenon, unless there's conflict or other types
of severe issues that arise.
Malnutrition is very much not history and quite common
across the world.
If you look at the UN agency the FAO in Rome,
they try to look at how many people are undernourished
in the world in 2020.
They would say between 720 and 811 million people
were estimated to be malnourished.
Let me ask now, how do we measure this?
So how are they coming up with these numbers?

How would you determine whether somebody is malnourished?
Yeah?
STUDENT: If they're getting under a certain amount
of calories a day?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so you can try to figure out
what is a requirement a caloric requirement that a person has.
How many calories should you consume in a given day?
And then we can try to measure, through food diaries
or the like, we can try to measure
how people are below or above what
we think is that threshold.
And that's exactly, in fact, what the FAO does.
Angela?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: So there's two parts to this, exactly.
We're going to focus on mostly today,
we're going to focus mostly on caloric intake,
do you eat enough calories.
But you're exactly right.
Calories are not just calories.
Some food is very helpful in other ways, be that like iron
or other types of avoiding anemia, et cetera.
That could be a very useful in avoiding
diseases, and so on, and so forth.
And you might say you might have enough calories.
But you have-- you're malnourished
in terms of some characteristics of certain types of food
that you don't eat.
Today, we're going to focus mostly
on caloric intake, overall caloric--
how many calories are people eating.
Next week, when we talk about health,
Esther will talk in part also about the quality
of food, what type of food are people eating,
be that childhood nutrition but also for adults.
And could it be that the quality of food
or the types of food that people eat, beyond caloric intakes,
are important.
Today, we're going to just talk about do
you have enough calories in the sense that are you hungry
because you don't eat sufficiently many calories.
I want to emphasize that measuring these requirements
is tricky.
It's really hard to figure out how many calories does somebody
need to function well.
So the whole approach of trying to measure
exactly what that threshold is and how that threshold changes
over time is quite tricky, in part
because things change in terms of how much physical labor are
people doing.
Hygiene and other types of conditions changed as well.
That maybe what used to be a caloric requirement
might be different now because people are not
losing that many calories by being
sick, or diarrhea, et cetera.
Be that as it may, there's symptoms of malnutrition.
Anemia, this is like low iron, low BMI, small and thin
children.
What is BMI?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Body mass index.
PROFESSOR: Body mass index.
And what do we measure-- how would you measure my BMI?
How would you find that out?
STUDENT: You basically take a combination
of your height, your weight, and then you
compare that with other people in your same age range.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, it's a function of essentially height
per weight.
And then there's a threshold again
where you say if your BMI, I believe it's 18.5,
if your BMI is below 18.5, for example,
you would say have low BMI.
And if your BMI is above 30, I believe,
then it would be like people are categorized as high BMI
or overweight in some ways.
That's exactly right.
But we're going to look at-- not going
to look at just how much do people weigh because people,
of course, some people are tall and other people are not.
So we're going to look at that proportionally or in relation
to people's height.
That's exactly right.
Now, recent increases in food prices,
inflation in particular, have made things worse
in terms of malnutrition.
What you see here is the graph goes until 2017.
And so if you look at this graph further,
you would see some increase in malnutrition.
So why is an increase in food prices particularly bad,
perhaps, for the poor?
There's two reasons for that, potentially.

Compared to everybody else.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Spend a higher percentage of income
on food, generally.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, so A, the poor don't have that much money
to start with.
But they also spend a higher percentage
generally on food as part of their budget.
And so now, they're disproportionately
affected if food prices go up compared
to other prices of other goods that they consume less,
that the rich consume more of.
And second, what's the second issue that
might arise because of this?
And this is very much the story of [INAUDIBLE]..
What could happen once people eat less?
Yeah, Lucas.
STUDENT: Well, they become less productive in work.
They're more susceptible to health issues.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, there could be a vicious cycle.
There could be an impact on people's nutrition
or their capacity to work.
And as a result, there might be sustained effects.
You might be in some vicious cycle of low caloric intake
and low nutrition, low income and productivity.
And therefore, that goes on and on.
People are trapped in poverty potentially.
And this is a very important idea
in development economics, which we're going
to now consider more closely.
PROFESSOR: What can we do now to reconcile this?
Really what we would want is evidence of unconditional cash
transfers.
Ideally what we were looking for is all along, which is to say
suppose I dropped some money from the sky
and gave it to people, what would happen
to people's caloric intake?
OK.
And this, as you already learned a little bit
about from GiveDirectly in class on Monday,
GiveDirectly is this NGO that essentially gives people
unconditional cash transfers.
What does that mean?
Essentially, they give people money unconditionally
and transfer them to people's phones.
And what unconditional means essentially
people can do with this money whatever they want.
OK.
And so now what we can do is we can look at these cash transfer
RCTs.
And we can look at now as people get more money
through this RCT, do they actually
spend more money on calories?
OK.
And so now here's the RCT.
This is an RCT done in Kenya in collaboration
with GiveDirectly.
What they were doing is they were looking they recruited
poor households in Kenya.
How do you how do you know whether somebody is poor?

How would you choose whether people are poor?
Whether they should be in your sample?

Yeah.
STUDENT: The bottom 10% of income.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
But how would you practically do it?

Go around and ask people?
Or how would you figure out whether somebody's poor?
STUDENT: If they're receiving like welfare from government.
PROFESSOR: You could look at, do they
receive government transfers?
Lucas.
STUDENT: You do kind of a physical survey.
So one, asking them how much they make.
And also looking at what they have in their home,
and doing based on that.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Exactly.
You can look at people's assets.
The trouble is like if you go around and asking like,
how poor are you, and people know that you're
going to give them $1,000, people will tell you
they're very poor potentially.
And so what GiveDirectly was trying to do
is looking at sort of fixed characteristics
of people's houses.
In particular, they're looking at,
for example, what kind of roof do you have on your house.
And that's kind of hard to change in the very short run.
And people with certain houses are
deemed to be poor enough to qualify for this study
and others were not.
But that's kind of broadly you're
looking for assets that are hard to change.
So some people were then randomized
to receive cash transfers.
It's more complicated than that.
But there's a pure control group that essentially just getting
nothing.
And there's a treatment group who are giving a treatment--
meaning they get essentially a bunch of money.
There was other random variation.
And for example, if there was like a male and female person
living in that household, some households
were randomized in the treatment group
to get where the male person received the transfer.
In other households, the female person and others,
they just had only one person.
There's also a variation in whether the transfer was
monthly versus lump sum.
And there was also some variation in how large
the transfer was.
Some people were getting small transfers,
and others were getting large transfers.
Notice you might wonder about ethical issues here.
Potentially, is that fair or is it OK to do this?
Well, notice that GiveDirectly, at least at the time,
didn't have enough money to give money to everybody.
So then the question is like, whom
should you give money potentially
among the many people who might really benefit from it?
So then randomizing seems like a fair thing
to allocate these resources.
At the time, there was still some randomization
within villages.
Like some people in the village were getting money,
and others did not.
They're not doing that anymore precisely
because they're worried about people getting upset
or people getting really sad.
And like your neighbor got a lot of cash and you didn't.
So now any of these studies that they're doing essentially
is only across villages, which have mitigates these concerns
at least to some degree.
But anyway, what we're trying to look for now
is well now some people are getting money
and others do not.
We're going to look for now is how much does
people's consumption change.
In particular interest in people's caloric intake.
So what we're going to look at we're
going to look at people's consumption in the treatment
and control group.
This is a typical regression table
that's in some sense you don't need
to know too many details of.
But in some sense, very simply these tables typically
have a control mean, which is how much does the control
group spend on food or other types of items in this case.
This is all per month in US dollars.
So the control group for example spends about $104 per month
on food.
Then there's a treatment effect in column 2,
which is the difference between treatment and control.
OK.
So this is going to say how much more does the treatment
group spend on food compared to the control group.
And then columns 3 to 5 we're going to ignore mostly.
These are the additional effects of whether there's
a female versus male recipient, whether there's
a monthly versus lump sum transfer, and so on.
Then there's a standard error of this difference, which
essentially sort of tells you something about how
precise this effect is.
And then there's little stars next to the number, which
should say, well, is this statistically significant?
Is this to say if we did this experiment 100 times
without any treatment, how often would it
be the case that we would find treatment
effects of this magnitude?
Could this be just by chance?
And if there's three stars here that essentially
means that it's very, very unlikely that these differences
are rising just by chance.
Anyway.
So what we see here is that the key thing
I want you to focus on is transfers increased total food
expenditures by $19.46.
And this is about 18.6% relative to the control group.
OK.
So you give people a bunch of money.
They increase their food expenditures.
Now, overall, expenditures increase by 22.6%.
This number here overall expenditures are here $35.66.
Relative to $157.61.
That's to say, overall expenditures
increase by about 22.6%.
And food expenditures by about 18.6%.
What is our elasticity or what can we
say now about this elasticity of food with respect
to expenditures?

Yeah.
STUDENT: It's like a little under one.
PROFESSOR: It's a little bit under one.
It's something like 0.8.
Notice that I'm using sort of expenditures and income
interchangeably.
What's missing here is like durable expenditures,
which you can abstract from.
But let's just say if you have something like--
if you spend $35.66 how much of that goes towards food?
And the answer is like about 19.46.
And the question is, does this proportionally more or less
than what you did before?
The answer is less than disproportionately.
It's about 0.8.
OK so the overall.
So what we're going to do here now is to say,
well, we have this increase of 18.6%.
Now one issue is that one thing you could do
is just say take the income transfer-- people are giving
something like $300 or $500.
Just divide the increase in expenditures by the transfer.
But that's not quite right because this
is monthly expenditures, and people
spend the transfer over time.
So really what we want is like we
want to divide the proportional increase in food expenditures
by the proportional increase in nondurable expenditures.
That is to say food expenditures increased by 18.6%.
Overall expenditures increased by about 22.6%.
The ratio of the two is about 0.8.
OK.
That's to say, again, we have an elasticity of below 1.
Now does that make sense what we're doing here?
We're seeing how much are people increasing their expenditures?
By what percentage do overall expenditures go up?
Do we see food expenditures that are disproportionately large
compared to that?
Now I'm talking to you about food expenditures.
Is that the right thing to look at?
What do we want to look at instead?

Yeah, Olivia.
STUDENT: Caloric intake.
PROFESSOR: Caloric intake.
Really, this is food expenditures.
And why do we want to look at caloric intake instead?
STUDENT: This is to where we can't--
nourishment.
Like malnourishment.
And food expenditure, you could be spending more like we
saw in the last example.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah.
And so if we're interested in caloric intake,
do we expect this a lot larger or smaller?

Yeah.
STUDENT: I think it was smaller in [? the last one. ?]
PROFESSOR: Smaller.
Right.
Because you essentially start eating more expensive food.
Notice that we actually see a little bit of this.
If you look at the effect on cereals,
it's about a 10% increase.
Like 0.23 divided by 22.5.
When you look at the effect on fish and meat,
you see essentially it's 5 divided by 12.9.
That's much larger.
That's to say we see already some
of this substitution happening.
So now what then [INAUDIBLE] et al. did,
they looked at food prices and estimates of calories
in the area.
And try to look at can we back out,
based on what people reported, can
be back out what people's caloric intake is.
And by doing that they find an elasticity of about 0.6.
PROFESSOR: So now, let me just summarize then what we saw.
So most studies that we have seen
have shown that there's a pretty robust increase
in food expenditures to total expenditures.
So if you increase people's overall expenditures,
food expenditures go up.
Notice that the exception was the Jensen and Miller
case that we saw, which might be a unique situation that's
not commonly happen very much.
But be that as it may, really any studies that have shown you
have an elasticity, that is clearly below 1.
That is to say, if you increase expenditures by 1%,
you will see food expenditures go up by less than 1%.
By something like 0.6% at best.
OK?
Now, as people become richer, they
don't increase caloric consumption proportionally,
in part because they substitute to other types of food,
perhaps because it tastes very good.
Now, this will make, essentially, the capacity curve
quite shallow because, essentially, it's
not the case that when people earn more money, they become--
they eat a lot more, and therefore they
become more productive.
Now, of course, the missing-- what's missing here?
What do we still need to do?
So now I've shown you, if income goes up,
nutrition goes up but by not very much.
What's the other piece that we need now?

Yeah?
STUDENT: So the impact of increased calorie intake
on productivity.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
And now we look for this.
Well, it turns out we actually don't
have a lot of great evidence for this.
Now one question you might first ask
is, well, why are people not eating more as they get richer?
Why they don't seize every available opportunity
to eat more if they can do so?
Well, maybe it's just the case that, in fact, it's
not particularly productive, as in maybe the productivity
gains of eating more are actually not that large.
And then if that's the case, well,
why not just eat yummier food or food
that you like better just because it's not
going to make a big difference for your productivity anyway?
And that's what we're going to look for now,
is we look at estimates of impact
of calories on productivity.
There's actually very few studies that exist.
There's one study by Strauss, 1986,
that studies the impact of calories on productivity
in Sierra Leone.
This is not an experiment, but Strauss uses the fact
that people eat less when the price of food goes up.
So they look at like, for exogenous reasons,
the price of food goes up, and now people eat less.
And now, can we see people being less or more productive?
Here's what they find.
He finds, essentially, that productivity goes up
as a function of nutrition.
That's good.
But again, we see some elasticity
of about something like 0.4.
We see essentially this function is concave.
It's not S-shaped at all.
It's not convex in any case.
The elasticity is highest among the poorest,
but it's about 0.4 among the poorest.
That's nowhere near 1.
It's 0.4.
So people do become more productive as they eat more,
but this productivity increase is not super large.
Now, there's some others.
There's very few other studies.
But broadly, other studies find very similar results.
What do they find?
So here's-- Strauss finds an elasticity of 0.4.
I should say, these are, I think,
farm workers or people doing very physical labor.
So we think, if you look at nutrition increasing
people's productivity, this is really
where you should look at.
If you think you're not strong enough to do certain work,
if you're a farm worker and so on,
that's maybe the maximum effect on productivity
that you might be able to find for at least caloric intake.
There's some experiment by Wolgemuth with Kenyan road
workers where some people were given--
some were given some food and others were given more food.
And you find an elasticity of something like 0.5.
There's, in fact, even a recent RCT
that finds no effect of increasing
caloric intake on productivity in flower plants in Ethiopia.
Why exactly it is we don't quite know.
But I think the main takeaway for this
is the elasticity is clearly below 1.
Now we have, essentially, estimates of two elasticities.
We have an elasticity of increasing income
on caloric intake.
That elasticity is below 1.
We also have an elasticity of increasing caloric intake
on income or productivity.
That's also below 1.
Now once you put these things together,
once we multiply these two elasticities,
we get something like 0.54 times 0.6, which is about 0.3.
What I was telling you, what we really need
is we need to intersect the 45 degree lines from below.
We need a slope of above 1.
But instead, we have a slope of max 0.3.
Now, there's a bit of a question,
for whom does that exactly apply?
But even if you look at different subsamples and types
of people, essentially this elasticity is clearly below 1.
That is to say, we don't think there's
a nutrition poverty trap going on,
at least in that formulation.
And notice that I haven't even talked about the fact
that increased productivity might not even
lead to larger wages.
We looked at productivity here, but it
could be that even if people become more productive,
they're not even paid that much more because the landlord
or whoever, their boss, just pays them the same
or not much more.
So overall, what's the summary?
It's, well, overall, this evidence
suggests that a nutrition poverty trap is unlikely.
And so any policies that you come across
that sort of says, well, the big problem
is that people are not eating enough calories,
is likely misguided.
So if you just say, well, feed people
because if we feed people they will become more productive
and become richer, that's not right.
Now you might say, people are not eating enough,
and therefore we want to help them in the short run
because that's bad if people are starving and so on.
That's, of course, very well warranted.
You might want to do that.
But it's not the case that you can expect the long run
effect of these types of intervention
through giving people more food or more money to eat.
Now, of course, this is not the end of the story.
So far we talked about very much short run effect of nutrition,
of caloric intake.
And as I said, there might be different things going on.
In particular, there could be longer run effects.
This is, I think, what Zion was saying earlier about
there could be improved micronutrient, iron,
et cetera, intake and so on, that if adults
eat better type of food, maybe in a year or two from now
they become more productive, potentially.
Second, I think this is most importantly--
and there's in fact some evidence that suggests that
there could be very high returns--
is child nutrition and more broadly child health.
That could be a very important mechanism through which
a poverty trap could emerge.
And the idea here is you provide a child in the short run
or even like one-time investment, be
that, for example, in utero, when the child is very young,
the child is fed well, or maybe some programs
such as deworming, which improve how much food people can
essentially keep in their body or what
happens to the nutrients that they're eating.
Doing that short run or one-time intervention
is potentially increasing people's capacity
over their entire lifetime.
That is to say, you do a deworming program or a food
program for mothers and children as they're
very young, that might make them healthier,
helps them stay in school, makes them stronger,
helps them learn more in school, and therefore, they
will be more productive for the rest of their lives.
And in fact, that's what [INAUDIBLE]
going to talk about next week.
There is good reason to believe that maybe
these types of investments have much, much higher returns.
And so, therefore, there could be some nutrition or health
poverty trap, in fact, going on, just not
in the way that we had hypothesized
in the first case--
in the first place about nutrition and caloric intake
overall.

Given the existing evidence on the income elasticity of calories, if there were a calorie-based poverty trap, what would we need to find for the effect of increased calorie intake on productivity? If you eat more calories…



… you’ll be much less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat more productive.

… you’ll be much more productive.




You have used 1 of 2 attemptsSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.
11.2
1/1 point (graded)
What does the evidence suggest about the effect among the poor of increased calorie intake on productivity? If you eat more calories...



… you’ll be much less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat less productive.

… you’ll be somewhat more productive.

… you’ll be much more productive.

True or false? A positive feedback loop (a.k.a., virtuous cycle) — e.g., more income today means even more income tomorrow which means even more income the next day, etc. — is sufficient to create a poverty trap.



True

False
correct
Show answer
Submit
You have used 1 of 1 attemptSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.
5.2
1/1 point (graded)
True or false? A negative feedback loop (a.k.a., vicious cycle) — e.g., less income today means even less income tomorrow which means even less income the next day, etc. — is sufficient to create a poverty trap.



True

False
correct
PROFESSOR: Now, you have read chapters 1 and 2 of Poor
Economics, and you have come across, hopefully, the story of
[INAUDIBLE].
What is the story of this person,
and what is the idea of the nutrition-based poverty
trap that he talks about?

Lucas?
STUDENT: I think kind of the main idea
is like he doesn't have enough money for food
and then because he doesn't get proper nourishment,
he gets weaker and he can't work,
and then, again, he can't get food.
He's even weaker.
He can work even less, and just like--
PROFESSOR: Right.
Exactly.
That's very similar to the story of Abu
that we had in the first lecture.
Now, talking about nutrition specifically,
you're exactly right.
He doesn't have work.
Why does he not have work, or what's his explanation?
STUDENT: I'm not sure what it was initially,
but he becomes too weak to do most manual labor.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Anybody remember why he is not working?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Was he too old?
PROFESSOR: I don't think so, but possibly.
STUDENT: He said he was depressed.
PROFESSOR: He was also depressed,
and what was going on with wages?
There was some theory about wages
or some ideas about wages.
What did he say about wages?
Evan?
STUDENT: They said that all the landowners fired
a lot of the workers due to price inflation,
and so he couldn't get a construction
job because he was too old.
PROFESSOR: I see.
STUDENT: And he kind of kept losing money
and didn't want to pay [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Right.
And in part, I think the wages were also-- some of the things
that he could do, the wages were too low
for him to have sufficiently much food.
Because he didn't have a job.
He was too old to qualify for certain jobs,
but then, some jobs that he could potentially do
were just not enough for him to eat sufficiently,
and therefore, he was weak, and therefore, he
couldn't work well, and so on.
So the idea is very much like with your wage,
with the work that you do, you earn money,
and with that money, you can buy food.
Food gives you strength, and that
allows you to get wages, OK?
That's very much like a cycle that he describes.
He doesn't have well-paid work.
Therefore, he doesn't make enough money.
Because he doesn't have money to buy food,
he doesn't eat enough, and because he doesn't eat enough,
he's weak and he cannot find work.
So he's sort of trapped in this cycle
of low caloric intake, of low food intake,
and low productivity.
And the idea is that, well, if you fix one of the two things--
if you gave him some money or if you had some land, for example,
things would be different.
How might things be different if you had land?
Suppose you had like a piece of land
that he could use for various things.
How would that change his life?
Olivia?
STUDENT: So like we had seen in the other story
I think two weeks ago-- you know,
like the guy who planted the jackfruit tree.
If he could do something like that,
that would give him additional income.
If he was already able to work on top of that,
it would help [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So land could help him, or if you were rich in other ways,
if he had inherited income or if he just
had some money available.
Otherwise, he could rent the land
or he could grow some things on this land.
Potentially, of course, maybe that would take a while,
but maybe he could just rent out the land
and get some income from that.
Then he would have enough income to buy food,
so he would eat more, and then he would be more productive,
and then maybe he would find some other jobs as well.
So you would be able to do work and afford doing the work
because he would have more caloric intake
that he wouldn't be able to do if he didn't have land,
for instance.
So there's a relationship between income today--
how much the person earns today--
or income tomorrow or maybe next week, very much in the short
run.
Similarly, this could be also related
to the wage level or the ability of the poorest people to work.
This is what we just talked about.
If you don't have land, for example,
if you're just very poor, you just
don't earn enough for a given wage,
if wages are very low, to eat sufficiently many calories,
and therefore, the people might be less productive,
and then they will not be hired because they are not
productive to start with, in contrast to somebody who
is richer who perhaps has land or other resources
available to them.
Now, what we're going to do is we're
going to try to analyze this more rigorously in some ways
and trying to take this argument very seriously
and trying to say, well, what are, in fact, the conditions
that we can write down that lead to such a poverty trap?
And the idea that we're going to use or the concept
that we're going to use is what's
called the capacity curve that I have a version of which I
have drawn out here.
What is the capacity curve?
What does it show?
Yeah?
STUDENT: I guess it shows the relationship between income
and your ability to work--
I guess the steep slope kind of showing how a certain income is
most optimal.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Let's start with what it shows.
Exactly right.
You said it's a relationship between income on the x-axis.
This could be past or current income.
Let's say it's current income.
And work capacity on the y-axis, which is like how much can you
work, which would be like productivity
or, how much can you produce if I hired you as a worker?
So what would be your output be if you
worked on my farm or anywhere else as a worker, OK?
And so the idea is that if you have more income,
that'll allow you to increase your productivity,
and the mechanism is, of course, increased nutrition, OK?
We talked about this already.
And so now, what explains the shape of this curve?
Why does it look the way it does?

That's my hypothesis, but Rodrigo, yes?
STUDENT: Yeah.
So I guess it's kind of showing the poverty
trap because if you make low income, you can't work,
so therefore, you can't make as much income,
so you're sort of trapped on the left side.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
We're going to talk about the poverty trap in a second,
but let's talk about the shape first.
Why is it flat to start with, and why does it
get steeper later?
What is the idea of that?
STUDENT: I guess as it gets-- as you get more income,
you're able to afford more food, so you can get more nourished
and therefore be more productive.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
As you get more income, you get more food
and therefore become more productive.
That explains why the curve is upward sloping.
Now, what explains why it's first flat and then gets
steeper?
Julie?
STUDENT: So I think the first part is probably flat
because even at your poorest, you would probably
take whatever amount of your income
you needed to not be truly starving.
So I think that's why it doesn't go
even lower at the bottom left.
And then at the top right where it's flat again,
I think is because once you have enough money
to eat however you like, there would be no reason to eat more.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So at the left, you're saying it's somewhat flat
because if you're very poor, you're
going to just spend almost all of your money on food,
and if you get a little bit richer,
maybe reduce the money that you spend on food,
so you're not going to actually get much more productive.
And you're saying on the right as you get really rich,
at some point there's like only so much you can eat
and perhaps then it also flattens out.
Angela?
STUDENT: So there seem to be two points of inflection
or three parts in which it is divided.
So the first part, whether you earn very little or a bit more
doesn't really change because either way,
you're not going to get many calories in.
So basically, your capacity will decrease
by one by a very increasing rate every single additional units
you have.
[INAUDIBLE] increasing returns because there's
[INAUDIBLE] where really that is where the difference is made,
so that's where the [INAUDIBLE] the person who
eats sufficiently to produce.
And then there seems to be a part where it kind of flattens
because your productivity is not going to be incredibly much
impacted whether you eat 2,000 calories or 2,100, 200
[INAUDIBLE] The difference is way more marginal than it would
be for that [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Right.
So let me summarize this.
So essentially, there's a biological explanation
as well, in the sense that you say,
once you have very little food and you eat a little bit more,
it's not going to help you very much
to be more productive because your body is very weak.
You just need the calories to survive.
If you have more money and buy more food,
it would just not increase your work capacity very much,
even if you increase your caloric intake by some.
There's a question about how much
are people actually increasing their caloric intake.
[INAUDIBLE] needs to say the body just needs
these calories to survive.
You're not going to be able to work productively.
But at some point, you reach this level
where additional calories make you stronger.
You're better to work hard and so on.
That's when the curve gets very steep.
But at some point, that again flattens off
because at some point, there's only so much you can eat.
Think of this as like having one meal per day,
two meals per day, three meals per day.
And at some point, once you have three meals per day,
it's not going to get any more and going
to be more productive by having a fourth or fifth meal.
But going from meal one to meal two
or to meal three of the day, you might
increase your productivity by quite a bit.
So this is very much this idea.
The first few calories are used by your body just to survive.
They do not make you stronger.
But when you start eating enough to survive,
the next calories give you strength.
And so the idea then is depending
on how rich you are-- so [INAUDIBLE],, for that matter,
who's very poor, may not have enough to eat
to be very productive.
But if he could eat more-- if he were richer--
he would eat more, and he would be more productive.
That is essentially his story.
Does that make sense?

Now, why might the curve have just depicted shape?
We already talked about this.
Work capacity is severely impeded
at low levels of income.
It does just not matter whether you're like really, really poor
or just somewhat poor.
Maybe it just doesn't change very much in your productivity.
So additional income makes a little difference
at low income levels.
But then there's a stark increase
in the work capacity at immediate income level,
and then at some point, there's only
small, small additional effects of additional incomes
at higher level.
That's what we just talked about, OK?
PROFESSOR: This is about nutrition now.
But notice on the left-hand side, we have-- on the y-axis,
we have work capacity.
On the x-axis, we have past or current income.
So I was telling a story about nutrition,
but you could also come up with other stories potentially.
What other channels could there be other than nutrition?
We're going to focus on nutrition today.
I just want to point out that this capacity
curve or this idea very much applies
to all sorts of other mechanisms or topics as well.
So what other channels could create a similar relationship?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Shelter.
PROFESSOR: Shelter.
And how?
STUDENT: I guess like a similar thing.
Like in the same way food could contribute to their health,
having a good shelter, like a place to sleep,
could contribute to their health and productivity.
And there's probably a positive correlation
between how good of a shelter they can have
and their amount of income.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so you're talking about shelter
and the idea being that shelter is good for your health.
It helps for your sleep.
It helps for maybe for anxiety or other types of diseases
that you might get, or like physical threats or other types
of issues that you might expose to if you
don't have enough shelter.
The poor might not have shelter.
They might be homeless.
And therefore, as you become richer,
you might become more productive.
There's a bit, then, a question of why
there might be an S-shaped curve or a linear curve.
But you're exactly right, shelter could be one mechanism,
more broadly, I guess, exposure to environmental conditions,
such as sleep, but also pollution, et cetera.
What else.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Medicine, like medical care.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so broadly speaking, health.
So I talked about nutrition, which is, of course, related
to health.
But you could also say health care more broadly.
It could be any types of medicine
that you have available that the poor just don't have available.
They're sick often.
And this is exactly what Esther, in fact, is
going to talk about next week.
And then as you become richer, you
might get then sufficiently rich that you
can afford health care and good health care,
and you become a lot more productive.
And as you become very rich, maybe then the additional money
doesn't matter so much anymore for your productivity.
That would be an example of health
creating this relationship.
Uh-huh.
STUDENT: It could be a relationship
with your access to transportation
to and from work.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, access to transportation, infrastructure
more broadly.
And how would that work?
STUDENT: Say you're poor, you don't really
have the money to get the access to transportation.
But as you have an increase in income
to the point where eventually you
can afford that transportation, and then your work
capacity increases, which [INAUDIBLE] there's
no really gain from having more access to transportation.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, for example, you
might say you live outside of the city,
it's very expensive to live in the city.
You then need to get access to reliable transportation
to get a regular job.
Now if you don't have a car or if you don't have access
to good public transportation, if you're poor, then
it's very impossible for you to get certain jobs.
But once you have more money or you get somewhat richer,
you might be able to buy a car, you
might be able to afford other transportation.
And then that allows you to become more productive,
get better jobs, and do certain jobs that wouldn't
be available to you otherwise.
Yeah, transportation, mm-hmm.
Christine.
STUDENT: Maybe education.
PROFESSOR: Education-- and how would that work?
STUDENT: So like the first few years education,
like learning how to read, write, or do basic math
and stuff like that, versus higher level schools, where
you would not see an increase in future.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so if you're--
at the extreme, you might say, if you're very poor,
you don't get a lot of education.
And therefore, you don't learn a lot of basics.
As you learn more, maybe you learn how to read and write,
but you'll not be able to do like a high paid tech
job or the like.
You really have to go to university
or to a secondary school at least.
And so notice that this is an intergenerational issue here.
If your parents are poor, the kids
will not receive good education.
And then you might be able--
might be stuck in a trap in, an intergenerational trap,
potentially, where, essentially, your ability to earn income
depends on your parents' income, potentially.
And the curve might very much look like this as well.
I'll take one more.
Javier.
STUDENT: I think what I was going to say was covered,
but maybe just like what calories are to health,
like the macro concept for like transportation and things
like that, are just like-- it's just like technology access.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, technology, access to technology,
maybe also access to credit or other types of opportunity,
access to the internet and so on,
and all sorts of types of information.
So there are many possible channels-- health, education
across generations, access to credit, savings
and investments, access to labor markets,
which I think was partially what you're
saying about transportation, but also
things like stress, depression, sleep deprivation,
which I think you're talking about,
in part, at least, when it comes to shelter.
We will study each of these topics one
by one throughout this course, using this capacity [INAUDIBLE]
the idea of potential poverty traps.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Is it fair to say that maybe as technology improves,
the curve becomes more linear?
Or is that like, you don't have enough data to say about that?
PROFESSOR: I think we don't know.
We can actually talk about now of the shape of this curve.
Notice that the shape of this curve is very much
like a hypothesis.
What we're going to try and test is, is there
a nutrition poverty trap?
And the idea of the nutrition poverty trap,
which we're going to talk about now, is a hypothesis.
And the question is, does it exist?
For each of these types of topics
the question is, do such traps exist,
which is very much an empirical question,
so we don't quite necessarily know how these curves evolve.
But I think it's a really important question to know.

PROFESSOR: Now we're going to look at the dynamics of income
over time.
Suppose that this curve is the way it is.
I drew it in a slightly different way.
Notice that it's fairly similar to this.
It doesn't really matter how it looks like on the left.
What's important is that we have some form of an S shape
like we have here.
So notice that there's also an S shape here.
Notice that I changed the y-axis as well.
Now here on the y-axis, we have future income.
On the previous axis, we had work capacity.
What are we assuming here?
What's different or what's the difference here?

Yeah.
Elliot?
STUDENT: Work capacity directly translates into future income,
so it'll reflect on the past [? or present. ?]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Work capacity I described previously
as your output, your productivity--
how much would you produce in a given firm,
on a factory, on a construction site, on the farm, and so on?
This is like your marginal product.
How much are you producing if you work for an hour
or for a day?
Notice that that's not necessarily what your wage is.
You might be paid a very flat wage, regardless
of how much you produce.
In many jobs, you're essentially paid
a flat wage that doesn't necessarily
depend on your productivity.
What we're assuming here is that your income
is proportional in some ways to your work capacity, OK?
Now, we also drew like a 45-degree line here.
So on the x-axis, we have, again, past or current income.
On the y-axis, we have future income.
Now, I also drew like a 45-degree line.
What is the role of the 45-degree line?
What do we need the 45-degree line for?
Yeah, [? Lucas? ?]
STUDENT: Because essentially your current income,
when you go up a year, your future income now
becomes your current income, so it converges to the--
PROFESSOR: Right.
Suppose these were like days or weeks, and so on, at a time.
If I wanted to know how things evolve over time,
I would go from current income.
I go to the curve and say, what does my future income
look like, which is the capacity curve.
And then I go to the 45-degree line,
when future income, in a week from now,
future income is like current income,
and I can do the same thing over and over again.
I'm going to show you that in a second.
But what are the points where the capacity curve intersects
with the 45-degree line?
What are those?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Points where your income stagnates-- where
it doesn't change over time.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
We call them stagnates or like it doesn't change over time.
We call these steady states.
Potentially, if you are exactly at this point-- for example,
the point that's drawn here on the figure--
if you're exactly on this point, you
will just stay at this point and nothing
will happen unless there's some shock or something that
pushes you one way or the other, right?
Because your current income exactly is your future income.
You will not move at all.
We call these steady states.
Nothing is moving once you're there.
But now, let's suppose you were at start at y 0 prime,
the way I've drawn it on the very left.
How does your income evolve?
How do we think about that?

Suppose you're here.
Now, how do we-- where are we going from here?
What is the evolution of your income over time?
Yeah.
[INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: I think so you can draw zigzag lines until you--
and then you end up at that point, the first steady state,
and then unless something perturbs you.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but let me--
just walk me through.
If I'm at y 0 prime, where do I go-- why
do I go to the capacity curve?
How do I how do I end up there?
STUDENT: Because that's going to be your future income.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So if I'm at current income y 0 prime, that's there.
I go up to see what is my future income,
and that's what the capacity curve shows.
OK.
Now, why am I going then to the right?
STUDENT: Because it's a 45-degree line.
It's going to tell you after a time step,
this is now your current income.
And then yeah.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
I'm going to the 45-degree line, because now once time passes,
future income becomes past or current income,
and so now the 45-degree line tells me
where I will be on the x-axis.
Because there future income equals current income.
So now I'm going to be at Y1 prime.
Yeah, [? Julie? ?]
STUDENT: I'm so sorry is this a hypothesis, or is this the way
it is?
PROFESSOR: I mean, this is the hypothesis is this.
This is what the capacity curve looks like.
That's hypothesized.
And we're going to try and see if that were true,
what would happen with income over time.
Later on in the second half of the lecture,
we're going to look at, well, do we actually
have evidence that this capacity curve looks this way?
And do we actually find some evidence of a poverty trap?
But this curve is very much like hypothesized.
It's hypothesized to look this way in part given the arguments
that we were saying earlier.
We're saying, essentially, like this is a slightly
different than before.
But we're saying there's some part where
essentially additional nutrition doesn't do very much.
It doesn't make you much more productive.
Then there's a part where additional nutrition is
very helpful for increasing your productivity and income,
and then it flattens off later.
That's what we previously discussed,
but it's very much like assume suppose this looks like,
what we expect to happen.
OK, so now we're at like y 1.
What happens after that?
So now we are like here.
Now what do we do next?

Yeah?
STUDENT: You repeat the same process.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
We do the exact same thing.
We find the corresponding future income
level on the capacity curve.
Once time passes, future income becomes past or current income.
We go essentially now to y 2 prime, which is here
on the 45-degree line, and we keep
doing that until we converge to a point at steady state,
where future and current income is the same.
So this is still a steady state.
We have the steady state here.
OK.
Now, suppose we started instead at y 0 double prime.
We started here instead.
I already drew it for you.
What might happen is instead of now going to this steady state,
you will end up going up here to the 45-degree line and so on,
and you end up at this other steady state,
further to the right, OK?
Now, what if instead you started somewhere here instead,
a little bit to the right of [? y 1, ?] [? y 3 ?] prime?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You go down to the first point.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So you can do this-- you can do this as an exercise yourself.
You can try out different parts.
Essentially, if you're somewhat to the right,
if you're in the region between this steady state
and this steady state, you're going to go to the left.
So everybody wants to start essentially in this area
until here goes to the left.
Everybody who starts here goes to the right and end up there.
Everybody who is to the right of this steady state
here goes to the right here, to this other steady state
where everybody who is very rich also ends up there, OK?
So what determines where people end up in steady state--
what determines is your past or current income.
That is to say, if you start with a high or low income, that
will be very important for where you end up in the future.
And now, what does that tell us about the potential
of some income transfers or some one-time transfers
to change people's outcomes?

Yeah?
STUDENT: You could potentially push people
into a different range where their new steady state
income is higher.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if you had somebody who was sitting somewhere
here in this area and you gave them a little bit of land,
a little bit of money that's regular money that you
could get, now--
or even just a one-time transfer of some money where they could
buy more food or the like, they would move--
the current income would move here,
and suddenly, they would move up over there, OK?
So essentially, we have the potential
through one-time or short-run interventions
to change people's outcomes in the very long run
by changing their steady states potentially.
How many steady states do we have?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Two right here.
PROFESSOR: What about this one?
STUDENT: Or I guess that--
I don't think we'll ever reach that one because--
PROFESSOR: What's different between this steady state
and that steady state compared to this one?
STUDENT: The direction in which you're moving across it.
PROFESSOR: So what happens in the vicinity
of the steady state here?
If you're a little bit to the left, a little bit
to the right, what happens?
STUDENT: You'll fall down to it.
PROFESSOR: You go back to that steady state
if you're a little bit to the left or to the right.
The same is happening here.
If you're a little bit to the left,
a little bit to the right, you move to that steady state.
This is what people refer to as a stable steady state, as
in like everything in the vicinity of that essentially
moves people to that steady state.
This one is an unstable steady state,
because if you're a little bit to the left,
a little bit to the right, you're not going to stay there.
You're going to move to the other steady states.
OK?
And then maybe there, in some sense,
here is also a steady state here on the very left,
but then you have nothing to eat,
and you probably starve, so we're not
going to think about this part very much.
OK.
Any questions so far?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Is the assumption that after the curve
continues there will be endless steady state
until the end [INAUDIBLE]?
PROFESSOR: We don't quite know how this continues.
I think we just say it flattens off and essentially just stays
here, but you could, in principle, this
could go further above.
There could be other steady states potentially,
but you would have to have some explanation of why it goes up
again.
STUDENT: At the end at some point, it does [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And so that's to say, essentially,
this would be the steady state for rich people, say.
But I think there might be other reasons why
people become richer.
Maybe they invest and other things, and so on and so forth.
Yeah.
But we're mostly interested in what
people refer to as a poverty trap, which
is the idea that there's multiple steady states.
So here, we actually have at least three steady states,
but two stable one.
This one is a stable one, and this is a stable one.
And where you start determines where you end up.
This is what we just discussed.
If you start somewhat on the left,
you're going to end up in the low steady state.
If you start further on the right,
you're going to end up at this high steady state, OK?
And this is what people refer to as a poverty trap.
People in particular who are in this area
here are trapped in poverty.
They're not able to make it to the other steady state.
Not because they're not capable and not
because they potentially couldn't be very productive,
but just because they're poor.
That is to say, they stay poor because they are poor.
And that's very much the idea of a poverty trap.

PROFESSOR: I think Julie was asking earlier about,
well, do we assume that this is the shape of the capacity
if curves looks that way?
What do we need to assume or what kinds of curves
create poverty traps and what kinds of curves do not?
That is to say, what is it here that
creates this type of situation?
What does a capacity curve need to look
like to create such poverty traps or a poverty trap?

Liam?
Yeah.
STUDENT: The beginning part would
need to be underneath the 45 degree lines.
So like, to the left.
PROFESSOR: So we need to be somewhere,
we need to be under, below the 45 degree line.
What if we're always below the 45 degree line?
Is that a poverty trap or not?
If you actually have it here, what if it looks like this?
I guess I already gave it away in the text,
but can you describe what's going on here?

STUDENT: This person reaches the steady state.
If they go any further, there's no more like steady states
available.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
There's only one steady state.
So everybody, if the curve looked like this, everybody,
regardless of where you started, would end up
in this steady state.
Right?
There's no other intersection with the 45 degree line.
So even if you started here, you would go all the way down here.
And if you started down there, you would go this way as well.
So if the curve is all the way below the 45 degree line,
even if it's S-shaped, you're not
going to have a poverty trap.
Similarly, if the curve, the S-shaped part
is all the way above, you're not going
to find a poverty trap either because everybody
will end up here now.
And I encourage you to print out these slides
or try to do that on your tablet or the like.
Try to write out different curves or draw different curves
and try to see, where do people end up?
And convince yourself that this has only one steady state,
everybody ends up in the same place.
There's no poverty trap.
Similarly here, this one only has one steady state.
There's no poverty trap.
Now, in addition, if you had something like this,
if the capacity curve looked something like this, again,
there's no poverty trap.
This is not a concave function.
There's no S-shaped curve here.
Everybody now, regardless of whether you end up here
or whether you start here or whether you start here,
everybody ends up at this steady state.
OK?
So now let me ask again, what do we
need to then assume for our capacity curve
to look like to create a poverty trap?
Yeah.
STUDENT: There must be some section below the 45 degree
line before some section above the 45 degree line.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
We need to essentially intersect the 45 degree line from below.
Notice that what we have here, we
have 2 intersections of the 45 degree line, one from above
and one from below.
And so now we get, essentially, a steady state here
and a steady state here.
And the S-shape helps, essentially,
intersecting the 45 degree line, in this case, 3 times,
and 2 of them are stable, steady states.
One is where the rich people end up
or people who start rich end up here.
People who start poor end up here.
So what we need is we need some S-shaped capacity curve
or something that essentially has some S-shaped pattern
or the like.
And then we need the capacity curve to intersect the 45
degree line from below.
And so crucially, what this requires
is that there needs to be some part here where the capacity
curve is very steep.
That's what we talked about earlier.
It cannot be that the capacity curve is very flat.
If you, for example, get this one here,
where mostly it's essentially very flat,
this is not going to help.
You need some part--
It might be flat at some places, but here, that
needs to be a very steep part of the curve.
And so if it's not the case that we
don't have a steep part of the curve,
or we don't have an S-shaped curve that intersects the 45
degree line from below, then there
is no poverty trap situation going on.
OK?
So I just talked about this already.
If you have a concave relationship,
there's only one steady state, no poverty trap.
If you have the S above the 45 degree line,
no poverty trap, only one steady state.
And if you have the S-shaped part below,
also no poverty trap either.
OK?
Notice that a double feedback loop,
as in like just there being poor nutrition lowers income and low
income means you cannot buy a lot of food,
is not sufficient for their existence of being a poverty
trap.
You have this kind of a feedback loop here either,
but essentially, it seems like the feedback loop is not
strong enough, you're not going to get above this 45 degree
line, and therefore, there is no poverty trap here.
So really, what we need is we need
to have not only a relationship between income and food
and between food and income, and this relationship needs
to be very strong, otherwise, there
is no poverty trap going on.
PROFESSOR: Now, I talked about this already a little bit.
Why is it important to know whether there is a poverty
trap?
Why do we care?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Because when you're trying to improve the poverty
level, you have to be aware if there's a trap
or not to know if your aid will help.
PROFESSOR: In the short run or in the long run?
So you're saying you want to learn about
whether the aid is helpful.
I'm asking in the short run or in the long run?
STUDENT: In the long run, because it
will help in the short, but if there's an income trap,
then you'll get pushed right back down.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if you're in a situation like this,
for example, if you start here, for example, or somewhere here,
aid will always improve people's income,
or their earnings, or their consumption,
et cetera in the short run.
But if there is no trap, everybody
will end up in the same place anyway
even if temporarily they're somewhat richer for a while.
So in the long run, if there is no poverty trap,
it doesn't matter in the long run
whether there was aid versus not for people's long run outcomes.
Of course, aid might be still very helpful
in the short run for people.
People are better off.
Potentially, they can eat more, they're happier, and so on,
but if you're interested in long run poverty alleviation,
then you need to learn about whether there is a poverty
trap, because the poverty trap might precisely
create situations where short run interventions are
able to affect long run outcomes, right?
So in this situation, you're sort of
stuck in the steady state always in the long run
where you are, regardless of--
even if you give people a lot of money,
they would eventually converge back
to their starting point or the steady state.
In this situation, you have the potential
to move people from one steady state to the next, OK?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I don't think I understand the [? extreme ?]
examples intuitively for why it would push back
to a lower steady state.
For a small income [INAUDIBLE] benefit,
but for larger [INAUDIBLE]?
PROFESSOR: It's just to say you need to essentially intersect
with a 45-degree line.
And if you're here, and I give you a huge amount of money,
you end up here.
You're going to just converge back to the steady state
regardless.
STUDENT: But why?
PROFESSOR: Because there's no--
STUDENT: I understand the steady state assumption,
but that's [INAUDIBLE].
I don't know why.
PROFESSOR: It's just to say there's some productivity
that people have where, essentially, you
produce some income and that income you produce
is not enough to be larger than your previous income
that you have.
That's to say, essentially, eating more food makes
you somewhat more productive.
Notice that these curves are all kind of increasing,
but it's not the case that it makes you disproportionately
more productive.
As in if I give you $100, it's not the case you might be--
so your income goes up by $100.
Your income in the next period will go up by $95,
and then the income in the next period will go up by $90.
So essentially, what you would need is that the income,
your future income, would have to increase by more than $100
to have-- or at least as much as $100--
to make that sort of persistent over time.
And if your income only goes up by a bit but not enough,
if the relationship is not sufficiently steep,
then essentially, you're just going to go-- at some point,
you have $90, $80, $70, and so on, you're
going to just converge back.
OK?
So if you had the situation here,
if this curve was steeper, then at some point,
you might be in a situation where
you could essentially-- this change would be self sustained.
You would keep making $100 more every period.
And so that's to say, in the nutrition case,
it would be the case I give you $20,
and now, you can earn $50 more every day
because you're more productive.
Then you're going to end up in a better place persistently.
Does that makes sense?
So you essentially need a disproportional gain
in income in the future or currently due
to some other income that you get.
Mikey?
STUDENT: An example of that would be
is if you were given a $1,000, and you spent it
on a party, and alcohol, or whatever, then it's
not going to help your future income.
And then you revert back to the previous state.
PROFESSOR: Right.
Or put differently, what Mikey is saying
is, well, if people just wasted their money trivially, then,
in some sense, your future income
might not increase even if you gave a lot of money to people.
But also, if people just don't have very productive ability
to invest in their nutrition or other types of things,
then you're just--
getting money is not able to increase your productivity
or your earnings in the future.
And what needs to be the case is that you get this money once,
and then by investing that money,
or by eating more, or investing it
in machines, or other types of things, your health and so on,
your future income has to increase by at least as
much over time to sustain that type of effect.
Which means, essentially, you have
to make it somewhere above the 45-degree line.
And at some point, you're going to end up
at the 45-degree line at a consistently higher level.
STUDENT: So once we define income
in terms of consumption, investment, or whatever,
and we adjust multipliers, and we
know a little more [INAUDIBLE].
OK, yeah.
PROFESSOR: The key question is, does your ability
to earn income increase sufficiently much
by some short run increase in income?
And if the answer is yes, you might end up
in a higher steady state.
Potentially, if the answer is no, you will not.
OK.
OK, we talked about policy already,
so if there is a poverty trap, then there
could be a big push, as in a small action could
have big benefits.
So it may be socially optimal thing to do.
So you might say that there is good reason for the government
just to give people cash, or other types of nutrition,
and so on to make people temporarily richer or better
nourished, because then they would increase their ability
to earn income, and that would persistently
keep them richer, OK?
And that would say we can help people get out
of a poverty trap potentially.
And many food programs or food interventions
have exactly that idea that to say,
well, people could be a lot more productive
if only they ate more.
And so now, we give people a bunch of food and hope
that people become more productive.
And that's what we're going to try and test now going forward.
Now on the other hand, if there is no poverty trap,
helping people in this way is still
going to be potentially helpful in the sense
that you give people money or food,
they're going to eat that food.
They're going to be less hungry and so on.
And they're going to be happier and healthier and so on.
However, that's going to be temporary.
It's not going to have any long-run effects, right?
The long-run effects you only get if there's a poverty trap
situation if you can move people to a higher
steady state potentially.
So if there's no nutrition poverty trap, for example,
you might just give people cash instead of giving people food.
There's not a lot of good arguments for giving people
food if you think that people are not trapped
in some nutrition poverty trap, and they're not
eating enough as much as they perhaps should.
And so then you might say giving people cash transfers,
why not just give them cash and let them choose anyway
unless you think there's something about food that
helps people invest in themselves in some way
that they're better off.
STUDENT: It's equivalent up to a certain point
based on what they spend on food.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly, and then they could choose
to spend it on food and other things, whatever
makes them happy.
And [INAUDIBLE] say what are we going to do next?
Next, we're going to look for a nutrition poverty trap.
What we're going to look at, we're
going to test the idea now empirically
whether low income leads to low nutritional intake,
and whether that, in turn, leads to low productivity and income.
So the ideal test that we would like
to do is we'd like to look at does the capacity curve
intersect with the 45-degree line from below?
That's to say, the , capacity curve needs to be steep
somewhere with a slope above 1, right?
If you intersect the 45-degree line from below,
that means your slope has to be very high,
and the slope has to be above 1.
And so then we're going to ask is,
does an increase in income today result
in an income tomorrow even larger
than the increase in income today?
That's what we're going to try and test.
Notice that the capacity curve has actually two parts to it.
There's the caloric intake as a function of income.
If I make you richer, do you eat more calories?
That's one part of it.
The second part is income as a function of caloric intake.
We're going to look at both of these.
We're going to look at the impact of increased
income on caloric intake.
Once you have more money, do you eat more food?
And second, we're going to look at the impact of increased
caloric intake on productivity.
Now, do you actually become more productive and earn more money?
And crucially, what we're going to need
is that the combination of those two things needs to be strong.
So just having one of those things being true
is not even enough.
We need to be a very strong relationship
between once people have more money, they eat more
and once people eat more, they become more productive
and earn more money.
PROFESSOR: The first part was merely
conceptual or hypothetical in some ways for saying,
for given capacity curve, is there a nutrition poverty
trap or any other poverty trap, and how might we test for it?
The key question is, is there a steep relationship
between income and nutritional intake and between nutritional
intake and low productivity or productivity and income?
So as I said, we're going to test now
for the empirical relationship in two ways.
First, we're going to look at the impact of increased
income on caloric intake.
As people become richer, do they now actually eat more,
and how much more?
Second, we're going to look at the impact of increased
caloric intake on productivity.
As people eat more, do they become more productive
and do they earn more income?
As I said, we need to have both of these relationships
to be strong for there to be a possibility of a nutrition
poverty trap.
OK, so the first question, you might say,
is, well, how much money are actually
people spending on food?
And if there were an S-shaped nutrition productivity
curve, what would we expect the poor to do?
Yeah.
STUDENT: You'd expect a large percent of their income
to go towards food.
And as they earn more, they'd spend more
on food proportionally.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so if there was really this type of trap,
if you're able to go from one steady state to the next
by eating more, you would think that there should
be some people, at least, who would spend a lot of money
on food.
You eat as much as you can to become more productive.
And, in fact, you're going to even optimize your food intake
such that you eat the most nutritious food in some ways,
OK?
And so you would eat as much as you can,
and you would expect first to be a very high share of the food
budget.
And it might be the case that if there's
some unavoidable expenses, for example,
you have, say, clothing or housing
and so on that you need to spend money on anyway that you just
can't avoid--
as you get a little bit richer, if somebody dropped some money
onto you, you would spend most of that money, at least,
on food, exactly as you said.
So suppose, for example, you had a budget
of 20 rupees, which is not very much, which is about $1--
sorry, less than that-- and spend
5 rupees on clothing and housing, and 15 rupees on food.
That's to say, you have to spend some money
on unavoidable expenses.
But everything else would be spent on food.
Yeah.
STUDENT: So is this assuming that there's not
an S-shaped curve for housing?
PROFESSOR: That's a great question.
So you might think that there could be also
a trap coming from housing and so on
and that you spent the money based on that.
I think, for now, let's assume that away
and say that doesn't necessarily exist.
You're exactly right.
There could be some other type of traps going
on, say, in health or other housing,
for that matter, that people spend the money on instead.
For now, we're going to assume there's a nutrition poverty
trap and only a nutrition poverty trap,
but we're going to revisit that later.
Now, suppose you magically got 10 rupees more.
You still have to spend 5 rupees on clothing and housing.
But then you spend essentially everything on food.
And then as you become even richer now,
you have 45 rupees per day.
You spent maybe a little bit more on clothing and housing,
but a little bit more on food and then a little
bit also on other stuff, for example, movies.
Now, what do we find now if you think about how much--
what are the shares that people spend
of their additional income on food and other things?
If you look at the person going from 20 to 30 rupees,
how much does the budget increase for that person?

Yeah.
STUDENT: 10 rupees.
PROFESSOR: And that's percentage?
How much is that?
STUDENT: Yeah, 50%.
PROFESSOR: 50%.
10 out of 20 is 50%.
And how much do their food expenditures increase?
STUDENT: By all of that, 10 rupees.
PROFESSOR: So it goes by 10 rupees.
And how much is that proportionally?
STUDENT: More than 50%.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
It's 10 over 15, which is 66%, I think, right?
So essentially, this person increases--
because there are some unavoidable expenditures
at the beginning, this person has a very stark increase
in their food expenditures as the person becomes richer.
And exactly as you say, they increase their food
expenditures by 66% in response to an increase
of their budget of 50%, which is to say the increase in food
expenditure is disproportionately
or is larger, relatively, compared to the overall budget.
So the share of food expenditure, in fact, goes up.
And then if you go another-- if you go from here, 30 to 45,
now we have another 50% increase in the budget,
which, of course, we made up these numbers that way.
Now you see essentially this flattens off.
Now the increase is only something like 20%.
So now we have a less-than-disproportionate
impact on food expenditures, OK?
So that's to say, there should be some people
who essentially spend a lot of money
on food as much as they can.
And you should see very stark increases
in people's food expenditures as people become richer.
So in this example, you go a 50% increase from 20 to 30.
It leads to a 66% increase in food expenditures.
And so once we divide these two, we call this an elasticity, OK?
The elasticity essentially is a question about,
by what percentage does food expenditure increase as income
increases by 1%, OK?
That's an elasticity.
We essentially say, as we make somebody 1% richer,
by how much do they increase their expenditures
on different things, in this case, on food?
And so now, here, we have a very high elasticity.
The elasticity is now, if you increase people's income by 1%,
they increase their food expenditures by more than 1%,
OK?
Now, if there is a nutrition poverty trap,
this elasticity should be very high for the poor.
We would think it should be above 1, in fact,
for some people, OK?
And that's what we're going to try and test for.
PROFESSOR: Now how much do the poor actually spend on food?
This is from some surveys from the World Bank LMIS
it's called.
It's partially reproduced in Esther and Abhijit's "Economic
Lives Of The Poor" article.
Here you see people living in rural areas with less than $1
a day.
This is all kind of for constant prices.
And you see people's expenditures
on food, alcohol, tobacco, education, health,
entertainment, festivals, and festivals expenditures.
And so now what do you see here now about how much do
the poor spend on food?
When you see this, now here you see people's percentages.
What do you think?

Yeah.
STUDENT: They spend a majority of their income on food.
PROFESSOR: Quite a bit, right.
So something like from ranging from something like 50%
to even 80% in some places.
Do you think that's a lot or not so much or what do we think?
STUDENT: I think it's a lot.
PROFESSOR: Looks like a lot.
Could it be more?

STUDENT: Yeah.
I mean.
PROFESSOR: How could they--
STUDENT: More than 80, I'm not too sure.
But I mean--
PROFESSOR: But take, for example, say, Mexico.
In what way could it be more potentially?
Olivia.
STUDENT: Decrease alcohol and tobacco consumption.
PROFESSOR: You could say maybe alcohol and tobacco could
be reduced.
You could say maybe festivals could be reduced for some.
Entertainment is not very much.
Health is actually not--
I mean, it's substantial but it's not that much either.
Notice that in some places there's also free health
care available.
For example, in Mexico.
Education is quite a bit.
Notice that that's often extras.
That's on top of often free public education.
You could say it could be somewhat higher.
Maybe not that much higher.
Notice that there's also, as you said,
there's quite a bit of variation.
It goes from something like 50% to 80%.
That seems to be at least some choice available
for some people.
Some people seem to want to choose alcohol or tobacco.
Some other people seem to choose festivals and expenditures.
But it seems to be some choice available
for some people at least but maybe not that much.
Now, what could people do now to increase their caloric intake?
So seeing these numbers, what would you say?
What could they do to increase their caloric intake?

One thing we said, you could cut back
on some of the other expenditures.
What else could you do?
Yeah, Samantha.
STUDENT: I know that in the chapter,
it talked about the quality of food
that they were consuming, especially
people opting for better tasting food
rather than just high calorie foods.
So I'm not sure what the makeup of the food is there,
but they could just prioritize high calorie foods
rather than trying to spend money on [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right, exactly.
There's two margins of adjustment potentially.
One would be spend larger share of the income on food.
And there's at least some potential
to cut back some other things, which you might not want to do.
But there's also you could eat different kinds of food.
For example, relatively more nutritious food.
Often delicious food is not that nutritious.
But in principle, you have a choice
between different kinds of food and you can choose
food that's more nutritious.
Now, next we're going to now actually--
so this is just to say, so overall, it
looks like people are spending quite a bit of money on food.
It doesn't seem that they're maximizing caloric intake
overall.
It doesn't seem like they try to eat as much as possible
and cut down everything.
But they spend quite a bit on it.
But maybe there's also different types of food
that they could eat.
Now, how can we test whether--
and this is what you were asking about.
How can we test about whether caloric intake increases
rapidly with income for the very poor?
Well, we can look at three things.
We can look at what people call the cross section.
We just look at across people with different income
and see what is their caloric intake looks like.
Second, we look at these studies that
look at the impact of food subsidies.
Once you make certain food cheaper for some people
and what happens then.
And finally, we're going to look at the impact of cash
transfers.
Let's start with this.
So the first thing that you can do,
and this is a paper by Deaton and Subramanian,
what you can do is you can look at people.
This is in Maharashtra in India in 1983.
You can look at people's log per capita income.
This is outlay, which is really just their expenditures
overall.
And you can plot that against people's log
per capita calories.
Why are we using the log?
Essentially if you use the log, then the slope
is the elasticity.
That's to say if you look at the slope,
the slope tells you if you increase income by 1%,
by how much does caloric intake go up?
This is called an Engel curve because there
was an economist or statistician called
Engel who was obsessed by food.
And so if you plot this curve, you're
going to essentially see something like this.
Notice that the slope is about 0.35.
That is to say if you make people 1% richer
or if you look at a person who is 1% richer per capita,
consumption of calories increases by 0.35%.
Again, we call this an elasticity.
By how much does caloric intake increase as people
become 1% richer?
And this is why we are plotting log as opposed to levels.
Log of these variables on the x-axis.
Log of caloric intake on the y-axis.
And now the slope is an elasticity.
Notice that this is what I was saying before.
We're looking for an elasticity above 1
for there to be a chance of there to be a poverty trap.
Now we have an elasticity of 0.35.
So that's not particularly high.
Notice that the way this graph or this estimation is done,
this doesn't have to be necessarily a straight line.
This could have had any shape.
This is an estimation.
So this could have been very nonlinear and curvy and so on.
But it happens to be very flat.
And it looks like even here for the very poor,
this is the poorest of the poor in Maharashtra,
even there the curve is not particularly steep.
So if there was a nutrition poverty trap,
you would have expected there to be some part in this curve
where things are very steep.
In fact, the curve is relatively flat with a slope
of about 0.35.
Yeah?
STUDENT: It feels like this isn't quite disproving
a nutrition poverty trap.
For example, couldn't this be explained
by if all of these data points were on the very tail of the S
curve and there's only modest gains in productivity?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So you're saying several things.
One is to say where on the S curve are people.
You're exactly right that people might be in steady state
or somewhere else and not quite in the curve
you're looking for.
We expect people to be in different places.
We expect there to be at least a high slope for some people.
But what we find is even among the poorest of the poor, even
among everybody in the middle, we
find no signs of any nonlinear patterns.
We find no sign of there being like--
if you look at even any subsample of people,
nowhere do you find to be a very high slope is to be found.
And therefore, it doesn't seem to be
that there's any sign that there's a steep relationship.
You're exactly right.
There's a question of exactly where
are people and are they in the steady state
versus not and so on.
There's also a question of here we're comparing people
across incomes.
We compare rich people versus poor people.
These are different people.
And it could well be that the richer people
are somewhat different than the poorer people in various ways.
Maybe they care about food more or less.
They have different tastes and so on and so forth.
This is not really quite testing that.
This is sort of a sniff test, if you want, and saying, well,
does it look like there's a very steep slope?
And the answer is not really.
We can [INAUDIBLE] for other types of tests as well.
Yeah?
STUDENT: I'm a little bit confused about the 1%.
So if you spend 50% of your money on food
and then your salary increases and you still spend 50%,
is that a 1% elasticity or a 0% elasticity?
PROFESSOR: So if you--
STUDENT: Like if there's no change in the percent.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So that would be an elasticity of 1.
So if you increase-- if you double your income
and you double your food, then that
would be an elasticity of 1.

And that would be like if you just
did the share that's spend on food stays constant, that's
essentially an elasticity of 1.
And we're looking for elasticity that's larger than 1.
So what we see here is you increase expenditures
by about 1% and consumption of calories only increases
by 0.35%, which is meaning it's about 1/3
of that expenditures goes towards food.
Now, it looks very linear.
Now, notice that they also did another thing they did.
Instead of having the caloric intake here on the y-axis,
they also had overall food expenditures on the y-axis.
And then they find an elasticity of 0.7.
This elasticity is 0.35.
They find about a twice as large an elasticity
for food expenditures.
What do we learn from that?
What does that mean?
What are people doing?

Yeah?
STUDENT: They're buying more expensive food
that doesn't increase their calories as much.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So they increase their food expenditures
by more than their caloric intake.
What does this mean?
They spend more money on food, about 70%
or they spend more money on food, but some of that,
exactly as you say, doesn't go towards increased calories.
But instead they're switching towards more expensive calories
per rupee spent.
So that's to say as people get richer,
they also buy more expensive calories.
And you can see this also here in Deaton
and Subramanian's work.
You see here people's expenditure patterns.
You see people's expenditure shares.
What you see here is the bottom 10%,
and that's a little bit small for you to see,
but maybe the people in the first row can see it.
The bottom 10% and the top 10% of people's income.
And what you see here is essentially
that people are moving from cereals.
If you look at the bottom 10% spends about 46%
of their expenditures on cereals while the top 10%
spend about 31% on cereals.
Richer people spend less money on cereals
but more on things like meat, fruits and vegetables,
and other types of foods as well as dairy.
And what you see here is on the right,
you see the price per calorie.
And if you wanted to just maximize calories, really
what you want to do is you want to eat essentially cereals,
because they're very cheap.
But as people become richer, they move away from cereals
and they buy other stuff.
They buy stuff like meat, dairy, fruits and vegetables.
And even within cereals, people move
towards more expensive cereals away from I think from rice,
I believe.
They move towards rice instead of more coarse cereals.
So the poorest spend about 9% on rice, while if you're richer,
you spend about 11% on rice.
And here you can see essentially the price for these calories.
People move to more expensive foods,
which suggests that people don't seem to be maximizing
caloric intake.
This is not what you expect if there was a nutrition poverty
trap.
If you're trying to maximize how many calories you get and I
give you an additional 100 rupees,
you should eat more calories as much
as you can to get out of the nutrition poverty trap.
But here, instead what people are
doing, they're buying more expensive things,
stuff that tastes better, stuff that's more fun and so on.
Very understandable, but it doesn't seem
they're maximizing the caloric intake overall.
So that's already kind of like a warning flag
that doesn't look like there's a nutrition poverty trap going
on here as people don't seem to be maximizing caloric intake
in the first place.
Yeah?
STUDENT: It seems like it could support the point
from the beginning of class, which
is that even though one component of nutrition
is calories, another component is nutrients.
And so it seems not to negate a nutrition based poverty trap
but instead to support there's not just a calorie
based poverty trap.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's a great point.
So you might say, well, people are eating more meat.
People are eating more fruits and vegetables.
People eating more dairy.
Maybe that has a lot more iron.
Maybe it has a lot of more nutrients, micronutrients
that are helpful that I might not pay off in the short run,
but maybe in the long run that might be really
important for your health.
Maybe it's really important for children in utero
or during childhood.
That has very long run potential effects.
Esther is going to talk about this next week.
But you're exactly right.
So what I'm looking for is a nutrition based poverty trap
based on caloric intake of people just
not having enough to eat.
But then exactly as you say, maybe food quality
or types of food that you eat is really important as well.
We're going to return to that next time.
You're exactly right.
PROFESSOR: The next thing you're going to look at,
and it's is a different way of looking at this,
we're going to look at the impact of food subsidies.
So Jensen and Miller is a famous study that looked at this issue
in a different way.
They searched for what's called a Giffen good--
a good whose consumption increases
when the price increases.
Why are Giffen goods surprising?
Why is that an odd thing?
Yeah.
STUDENT: It doesn't really follow a classic notion
of supply and demand.
PROFESSOR: Mostly demand.
How?
STUDENT: Generally.
PROFESSOR: What is the law of demand?
STUDENT: Demands goes down.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Demand, if you took 1401 or any other econ class,
they will tell you demand curves tend to slope down.
As in if things get more expensive,
you consume less of it.
As in, like, if I increase the price of something,
you're going to demand less of it.
Now, Giffen goods are an exception
to this, where essentially as you increase the price,
people's consumption of it increases.
This is a little bit like a unicorn in economics.
People always had-- this is a conceptual thing
that people thought existed but nobody's ever seen one.
It turns out Jensen and Miller in fact found one,
at least in the study I'm going to show you about.
OK?
Now, as I said, we expect demand curves to slope down.
Now, how is it possible that as a price of a good increases,
people's consumption increases as well?
What must be true or what's going on?
Yeah.
STUDENT: That the higher price is
an indicator of some sort of impressive quality
perhaps, so people are ready to pay that higher
price [INAUDIBLE],, but they also expect that food to be better
[INAUDIBLE].
That price should reflect some of the--
PROFESSOR: Right.
So it could be that there's a signal of quality and so on.
I think this study is trying to abstract from that.
You're exactly right that the price
could be a signal of quality.
What could also go on?
Let me ask differently.
For example, suppose we reduce the price of something
and you eat less of it.
What could be going on as well?
Or can somebody-- somebody know what income and substitution
effects are in economics?
Olivia.
STUDENT: Yeah.
I mean, it could be something like a luxury good.
Like we talked about lobster I know in 1401.
So even if price increases, you're going to consume more
or there's a lack of substitutes.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So essentially, when a price of a good increases,
there's two effects going on.
One is what's called a substitution effect.
You want to consume less of this good
because it has become more expensive
relative to other goods.
OK?
You choose between apples and bananas.
Apples become more expensive.
You're going to choose more bananas compared to apples
just relatively because it's a better deal to eat bananas
compared to apples.
That's a substitution effect.
OK?
The substitution effect is always a negative, in the sense
that as the price increases you want less of it.
But then there's an income effect.
So normal goods have a positive income effect.
You consume more as income goes up.
Inferior goods have a negative income effect.
You consume less as income goes up.
What's going on here potentially is that people become richer,
and now they switch away to other types of goods.
So this would be in the case of rice
or other types of basic food that we just saw--
as people become richer, they choose, essentially,
to eat other types of goods, or as they become poorer
or they eat more of it.
So in this case, for example, here, what we have seen
is, as people become richer, they eat less of, say,
[INAUDIBLE] and so on.
Which is to say, that's an income effect that's negative,
which is people become richer, and now they
switch to other types of goods.
And so, now, here, Giffen goods now
are inferior goods with an income effect
that is so strong that it dominates the substitution
effect.
That is to say, it becomes more expensive
and now you would think people eat less of it.
But now, there's still the negative income effect, which
is to say you consume less as--
right.
So normal goods have positive income effects.
Inferior goods have negative income effects.
So you consume less as income goes up.
Now, if I increase the price of a certain good,
now, essentially, you have less money
available, and for an inferior good which has negative income
effects, having less money available
leads people to eat more of it.
OK?
And so, that's to say, there might
be situations where people--
certain things become cheaper.
So if I make a certain good cheaper for you,
you would think that you should eat more of it.
But now, by making certain goods cheaper for you,
you also become richer.
You can afford more overall because you
have to spend less money on that good.
Now, essentially, as you feel richer,
you substitute to other types of goods.
And so, now, if you start eating shrimp instead of rice,
if I make the price of rice cheaper for you,
you might eat actually less rice despite the price
of rice going down.
Does that make sense?
So I'm going to show this in a specific context.
So the goods that people look at in China was rice,
and they found that in cities where the price of rice
is higher, people consume more rice.
And they argue that, well, really should see the opposite.
But it seems to be that if the price goes up,
people actually consume more of it.
Now, why is that not conclusive?
I think for two reasons.
One could be that that's for supply reasons.
In rich cities, maybe people just
charge higher prices and people eat more there anyway.
Or it could be that perhaps prices
are a quality signal in some ways,
and people perceive the quality of rice
to be higher when the price is higher.
So now, what they do is they do an RCT to look at this more
specifically.
So they have a sample of households in Hunan in China,
and they randomly choose a subsample of them.
They give people vouchers to reduce the price of rice
to this random subsample for more than a month's supply.
They make sure that the households do not exchange
or trade these vouchers.
So otherwise, you just give people money.
And then, after six months, they ask household detailed
questions about their consumption of rice, wheat,
and other stuff.
OK?
So now, what have we done here-- or what
have they done in this study-- they reduced the price of rice.
And now, the substitution effect should
say people should be eating more rice.
Rice becomes cheap, therefore it's a better deal
to buy rice-- you should eat more rice.
But the income effect might go the other way.
You reduce the price of rice.
People become richer relatively--
they have more money available to buy things.
And so, now, they might switch to other types of goods.
And that's the income effect going the other way
potentially.
And what this test is now, they kind of look at,
well, is the income effect sufficiently large to overcome
the substitution effect?
And that's exactly what they find.
So when the price of rice decreases
by 10% due to these vouchers that people are given,
rice consumption decreases by 2.5%,
and the elasticity is in fact negative.
That's to say, Jensen and Miller found a Giffen good.
That is to say, households consume more now
of other goods.
So households with a subsidy report
increased consumption of seafood and maybe meat.
And so, what's happening here is that people
get a subsidy on rice, they spend less money on rice
overall, and they use this extra money to not spend it on rice,
but rather they spend it on other types of goods,
including seafood and meat.
OK?
And that's the definition of a Giffen good.
Now, why does this matter here?
Well, what we're interested in is the income effect.
We're interested in what happens as people become richer.
Do they spend more money on nutrition?
And what in fact we see is, well, it
doesn't seem to be the case.
And in fact, for some goods, not only is the elasticity not
above one, but in fact it might even be negative.
Yeah.
STUDENT: So this-- the rice example
is proving that if the price of a product
increases the demand doesn't increase.
But Giffen good is when the price increase the demand also
increases.
So I don't know why this one is a Giffen good.
PROFESSOR: So the price is going down,
and then now people are in fact eating less of it.
So what people are doing--
not only are they not increasing their consumption of rice,
but in fact they're eating less.
STUDENT: But isn't the definition of Giffen
good is when price increase the amount--
PROFESSOR: Ah.
Sorry.
You can-- this is both directions.
So if the price-- so sorry.
I defined it the other way around,
and maybe that's confusing.
So what I wrote here is as the price increases,
consumption increases.
Conversely, as the price decreases,
consumption decreases.
That's supposed to be equivalent.
Yeah.
So here, in this case, we find that through the subsidy
the price decreased, and people now
decreased their consumption.
Now, that's interesting for two reasons.
One is that there must be essentially a negative income
effect.
As in, as people become richer, they substitute away from rice
to other things.
And second, it tells you something
about targeted subsidies.
So if you want to do nutrition policy and so on,
many countries have food price subsidies
to encourage greater nutrition.
That is to say, for example, India
has a national subsidy for rice and rice-consuming regions.
Now, what do the results from Jensen and Miller
suggest for such policies?
What are these policies doing now?

Yeah.
STUDENT: They're actually not affected at all.
[INAUDIBLE] to increase the consumption of rice [INAUDIBLE]
actually decreasing.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if it's really the case, and if you're
sort of in this Jensen and Miller world,
then not only are we not doing very much,
but in fact it might even be counterproductive.
As in to say, if households consume less rice and more
shrimp, but shrimp are not very nutritious per dollar spent,
the effect on caloric consumption of subsidizing rice
might not be large, and it may even be negative.
OK?
And this is in fact what Jensen and Miller found in Hunan.
This is not only the case for calories but also
for other nutrients.
Going back to your point, maybe people
are eating worse nutrients potentially.
And so, we want to be very careful
with these types of subsidies.
In addition, what do we learn from about the effect of income
on caloric consumption in this population?
Well, it must be negative.
People are now actually eating--
since shrimp are worse calories compared to rice, people
eating less rice, more shrimp.
And now, people, actually as they become richer,
they eat fewer calories.
OK?
So that's to say, that's another sort
of red flag for a theory of the nutrition poverty trap.
As we increase people's income, people
don't seem to be eating more nutrition.
Now, you might say, wait a minute.
Didn't you just show me that the Engel curves are positive
previously?
Right?
Previously, I showed you-- let me go back to this.
Previously, I showed you the Engel curves for India.
And I showed you, as people become richer,
people eat more calories.
And the slope was something like 0.35.
Which is to say, if you gave people 10% more income,
you should see a 3.5 increase in people's caloric intake.
Now, I'm showing you a different study in India and China
that says, in fact, look, this income elasticity
might in fact be negative.
So how are these things consistent?
What could be going on?

Let me ask differently.
What comparisons are we making here versus what comparisons
did we make previously?

This is within and across people.

STUDENT: Within.
PROFESSOR: It's sort of within in some sense.
Some people-- I'm randomizing some people into subs.
It's across people, but I'm subsidizing
some people versus others.
But I'm holding constant everything else.
You're randomizing people to be very similar treatment
and control, and then we change people's food prices
in some ways and look at what happens.
So it's holding constant ideally everything else.
Well, in the previous graphs that I
showed you was across people.
We're comparing poor versus rich people,
and that slope could be very different from a slope
that we find here.
Notice that in addition, of course, also
very different settings.
This is India versus China.
And it could also, in fact, in another setting,
in Gansu Province, Jensen and Miller
did not find evidence of a Giffen good.
That's to say that this elasticity might be positive,
but in some cases it could be negative,
in some cases it could not.
