PROFESSOR: So today, I want to talk about education,
for the hours, for the two hours we have in front of me,
or a little less than that.

So one thing that, it might not be so obvious to you
is that, in fact, kids mostly go to school.
So the problem that we have in education
are of a different order of magnitude
and a different type of issues than we
have in health, where a lot of people in health
don't access to basic services.
In education, the COVID-19 was literally a tsunami
because the schools were the first to close and the last
to reopen in many countries around the world, not just
the US.
But before the pandemic, this is a map from 2010,
where you're seeing that if you are in the dark blue,
90% or more of the kids are enrolled at the primary level.
There are places that are not covered at all in any colors.
But of the places for which there is data on this map,
you can see that the vast majority of countries,
with exceptions of this country in the Sahel region,
have very high enrollment rate.
And this is something that has steadily improved since
the 1990's.
Even though there are more children
in the world because the population is still growing,
there are fewer children who are out of school.
And children here is defined up to a secondary school year.
So even if you go till age 17 or 18,
you now have fewer than 300 million
of children who are out of school,
when it used to be something like 370 million children out
of school.
And the kids who remain out of school
at this point, a good fraction of them
are kids who don't get a chance to attend a secondary school.
In many settings, primary school enrollment is very large.
There are not very many kids who are missing.
Then kids also go to secondary school in larger number.
And then they are-- in upper secondary school,
we are starting to lose people.
So people mostly go to school.
Kids mostly go to school.
But they are absent a lot.
So this is a map on which there is not
data for all of the countries.
But you can see the contrast.
Blue is, again, the good outcome.
And here, the red and white on this heat map
are the bad outcomes.
You can see that of the countries for which we have
data, it's the same countries, some of the same countries
have low enrollment rate.
But many more have, say, like Pakistan
here, has high enrollment rate but very low attendance.
Sometimes, less than 50% of kids on any given day
are present in school.
So kids are absent a lot.
And so they are enrolled.
But they might not go every day.
It's not the same kids who are absent all the time.
So it's not that it's fake enrollment.
But of the kids who go to school,
it's kind of on and off, on and off.
So why are kids going to school?
Let's spend a little bit of time discussing why our parents--
after all, it's parents who are sending their children
to school.
Why would they send them to school?
What are benefits that, as individuals, they
can expect their child to get from having gone to school?

STUDENT: Theoretically, a higher earning potential.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, they could make more money,
get better jobs and so on.
What else?

STUDENT: Just a greater ability to grapple with everyday things
to do, such as managing your own finances,
understanding what's around you, taking
just the right decisions.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, they might just be
better able to read instruction packages for a medicine
for their kids or put together IKEA furniture, or maybe
more relevant, figure out how to read a package of fertilizer
seeds, and therefore, as a result,
not just have better jobs, but have
better outcome in their life.
Angela mentioned one of them.
Another one could be health, for example,
that they are better able to understand health care.
We saw that it was an issue.
All right, what else could you find, could you
have as private benefits?
Yes, [INAUDIBLE].
STUDENT: It's more safe to be in school than be wandering about.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so school might be a safe babysitting option.
This is often underestimated.
But during the pandemic, we realized how important
it is to have a place where you can
park your children, absolutely.

What else could there be?

Why are you getting your college degree?
So all of these, I'm sure, are part of it.
But if you introspect on other reasons
why you decide to go to college, what could it be?

Lucas?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: Yeah, so we mentioned income increases
for yourself, and potentially later on, absolutely.
But is money the only reason why you're here?
No, why are you here, Julie?
STUDENT: More just learning and opportunity.
I feel like you would--
both, like, maybe education could give you
opportunities to go work and learn and help people and maybe
go somewhere new, or--
I don't know.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but beyond the earning potential,
you might be more likely to figure out what your passion is
and to realize yourself as an individual.
It opens opportunities.
Samantha?
STUDENT: Going off that, just like the type of work
you can do when you're educated as well.
Like, maybe a lot of the uneducated jobs
that you would get are more like field work,
or things that you wouldn't want to be doing when you have
a greater potential to have [INAUDIBLE] that's
less [INAUDIBLE] demanding or something that you're
interested in [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yes, besides the money,
you might find a job that is more interesting.
You might find a job that is less painful,
that doesn't require physical labor.
So the whole package of the job might be more interesting.
You might also find something that you never
would have found just because without going to college,
you wouldn't even know that there is
this possibility of this job.
Before going to college, maybe you
think you can just be an engineer or a doctor.
And when you come to college, you
realize there are also economics for you.

You might also just enjoy learning for the sake of it,
reading, sitting in classes, hearing people tell you stuff,
reading books, and so on, figuring out problems.
So there are potentially some private just enjoyment
of education.
And your parents are probably very proud that you
are going to school.
So that's also a benefit of education,
is that there's just a simple utility value, consumption
value of having a kid being educated and particularly
getting an MIT education, but even something similar, being
the one kid in the village that goes to high school or so on.
So those are various benefits to the individual
or their parents.
What are the additional benefits that society
might get that don't accrue directly to the individual?
So on top of all of that, of course,
all of these individual effects are also effects for society
because the individuals compose societies.
But are there effects of education over and above that?
Yep?
STUDENT: So I think it's more stable politically
because people learn to respect the government more.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So people who go to school might learn about politics.

So the exact way you phrase it is the way that [INAUDIBLE]
phrased it in a book on education, that basically,
education teaches you to be well-behaved,
to be organized citizens.
So that's very much in this stability dimension.
But you could also just learn to be curious, learn
to learn about the world, learn to be critical, and so on.
So there might be political gains,
gains about the politics.
Olivia?
STUDENT: The introduction of new industry,
like the call centers that were mentioned in the reading.
PROFESSOR: Right, so with educated people--
so how does education lead to call centers?
STUDENT: I guess they realized that there
are more jobs that were available for women
who had some sort of education.
So it was cheaper for them to have the call centers.
PROFESSOR: So is that a social benefit--
or is that a societal benefit or private benefit,
the fact that if I'm educated, I can
get the job in a call center, and otherwise not, or both?
STUDENT: I think it's both because there are
other people in their families.
Their parents might be affected by them
having a job because it might mean they
can have income [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Right, so from the point of view of the dynasty,
maybe of the family, that's still an individual benefit.
The money she makes can be then shared in the family.
On the other hand, the fact that she gets an education
might also open doors to others.
So that can be a societal effect that it spreads in this way.
Yeah, Julie?
STUDENT: Yeah, they might come back with creative ways
to help tutor or, I don't know, some new program, like,
help organize the way the town does
their finances or food or lots of things
that they might just want to help.
PROFESSOR: Right.
Lucas?
STUDENT: On the macro scale, if women are educated,
they're less likely to get married early, less likely
to have multiple children.
And so they can put more resources
into each individual child, which
lowers the burden of the government and the state
to take care of people.
PROFESSOR: [INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] the cultural identity
of the community because all the kids get to socialize
and be in the same environment.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So let me take these three points.
One, the point made by Julia, is that there
might be what economists call externalities,
productive externalities, of one educated person.
You can find them in the workplace,
for example, where one educated person can teach other people
how to use the machine.
For example, the one farmer who knows
how to read the instruction in the new seed packet
can then inform other people how to do it.
Or as Julie said, the one educated person
can come back and tutor the kids,
or can come back and help them all get immunized
or bring general life, value to the village.
Then [INAUDIBLE] point is connected.
But from a cultural standpoint, socialization
in a common ideology, common goal, common values,
et cetera, can also bring, in connection to Danielle's point,
about the stability benefits of education.
And then Lucas mentioned something
which is both a private benefit and a social benefit.
I don't think we mentioned it in the private benefits,
although it was present in Angela's comment,
is the idea that women who are educated
can have fewer children.
They might choose to have fewer children
because they have other things to do than having children.
So it becomes expensive to have children because they
could otherwise work.
They might be able to have fewer children because they
can understand contraception.
And the children that they do have,
they might be able to take better care of because they
understand how to go to the doctor,
how to deal with various ailments that they might have,
and so on.
So their kids themselves might be healthier,
might have less difficulty in school.
That's a private benefit because you like your children.
It's also a social benefit because whatever
the family doesn't take into account,
society ends up having to shoulder part of the burden.
So those are the types of social benefits
that we expect from education.
So I think we covered roughly everything
that I had on my slide, better, more higher wage, better
health, better health for children.
More educated workers can train others, fewer children
in better health, more educated voters, and so on.
PROFESSOR: So given that, why should the government pay
for schooling, or for part of education, or for all of it--
should the government pay for schooling?
Most governments have education budgets.
Should they?
And what should they pay for?
And for who?
And at what level?
And why would be a longer version of this question.
What would be a rationale for, we
don't pay-- the government doesn't pay us to buy cars.
So why would they pay us to get an education?
Angela?
STUDENT: Because, in a way, highlighting what we've seen,
not only are there benefits, but also, education
is some sort of equalizer in a sense
that it's something that shouldn't
be dependent on income because it's a baseline
to do well further on.
So if education is just left of the private market,
it starts inequalities from the start.
There's no chance that--
and it's very hard to make up for
and to get later on all the benefits
that one would get while being in school.
PROFESSOR: So that could be one of the reasons
is that it's a fairness reason, that we should--
it's just a way of limiting inequality.
So but why not give people money then?
Why force them to buy education?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Because it's not their--
because it's the parents' money, not the kids' choice.
So with a car or something, you could just
give money because kids don't drive
and that would be their choice later in life.
But with schooling, it's a parent
could affect the way their kids' life.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So that would be a first reason that there
might be a conflict between the parent and the child,
that the parent might not fully internalize
the welfare of the child and might not
take-- if you give parents enough money
to make the education decision they want,
they might or might not make the education choice
that is in the best interest of the child.
So that would be one idea that the contracting
between the family is not necessarily perfect.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, as a society, you determine it is better
to educate people than--
it becomes maybe the government's responsibilities
to have some sort of baseline for providing schooling
to people who may not afford it either.
So having it be a public good and it being net good
when most of it was said.
But you have to ethically intervene, because it's--
you determine it's better for you to get schooled.
And you're too young to have any other choice, I guess.
PROFESSOR: I agree with that entirely,
but you have to say why.
You have to say why it's better.
So and there are two reasons why it's better in your claim.
It's one is some parents might not be able to afford it.
So some parents might want the right level, the optimal level
of education for their children but not be able to pay for it.
So that's a credit constraint argument,
which in principle could be alleviated
by giving people enough money.
And the other is that the, again, it's
the contracting issues that the parent might not
make the decision that is in the best interest of the child.
For example, if to some extent the benefits of education
comes from a utility that you're getting out of it,
and you're proud of your children,
if in a particular society, parents
are only proud of educated boys, they
might not educate girls, which would certainly not
be in the interest of girls.
So the government might decide that-- or as a society,
we might decide that it's not OK.
As a society, we might decide that we want everyone
to be-- we meaning the big we.
So it means, it's only some parents
who are deciding to not educate their girls.
But the girls have no voice in the matter.
And the government intervened to--
in the middle of that.
So that would be-- that's a class of reasons.
What would be another reason why?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Maybe from a zoomed out cost perspective, it's
[INAUDIBLE] investment.
So to pay the upfront cost of getting kids educated,
then they'll avoid paying greater externalities later.
PROFESSOR: So there are two things in what you're saying.
One is the investment and one is externalities.
So on the investment side, correct, it's an investment,
but it's also an investment for the parents.
So the question is, why is the government better placed
to make this investment?
One possibility is the credit constraint.
One possibility is if the parents don't fully see the--
realize the value of the investment.
One reason why they might not fully
realize the value of the investment
is the second point you're making about externalities,
which is some of the benefits of education
we saw don't accrue to the individual or to the family,
they accrue to society at large, potentially.
For example, the [INAUDIBLE] effect
of coming back and starting a tutoring center for the kids.
From the point of view of the parents,
they don't necessarily take that into account.
Or your point about having a common culture.
Or Daniel's point about economic, political stability.
All of this doesn't enter in the calculus of parents.
Even if they had all the money that they needed,
that's not how they make decisions.
On the other hand--
yeah, go ahead, [INAUDIBLE].
STUDENT: Just going off your point,
I guess like we talked about a couple of lectures ago,
[INAUDIBLE] individual societies,
it's easier for citizens to just happen
to do the right thing passively.
It actually, depending on the implementation,
it would be an investment on the parents
through taxes or something.
It would just be a way for them to,
I guess, yeah, then to even still personally make
that investment, and all the benefits
they would realize the individual family level.
PROFESSOR: That's a great additional point.
It's another reason why you might not
get the optimal level of investment
is that it's just one more decision to take into account.
And we have so many decisions to take
that we can't get all the right decision in our mind.
So, for example, in countries like in Kenya,
where parents have to pay school fees,
school fees are always a huge reasons for stress,
just when you need to pay them.
And then, because of the inability to pay school fees
or to pay for a school uniform, some kids might drop out.
Even though their parents would have liked them to stay,
but that would have required planning
to get-- to collect the school fee,
and they're unable to do that.
They would prefer to pay a little bit of taxes every day
on their food or on--
or directly on their income and not have to pay school fees.
It does help.
It doesn't rely on the planification at every moment.
Great.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, I would think this
is super similar to the vaccines alarm clock situation.
Because each day, if school is not super urgent,
no immediate benefit could--
so I think, if it's either--
if it's free and illegal not to go, or like
school lunches or something, then it's
a lot like the vaccine center.
PROFESSOR: Yes, absolutely.
There would be an internality, even for someone
who loves their children dearly, the benefits being
in the future, but the cost being today, the cost
are always going to loom large.
And, therefore, people who suffer from this clocky problem
will tend to under-invest in education-- their own
and that of their children.
For children, for example, typically we
don't give them the choice, because on a day to day basis
it's costly to do your homework.
But then, there is some benefits in the future
that the parents is able to incorporate-- internalize
as a superego but not necessarily the child.
So we can see how it works and could work similarly
for parents as well.
Another last reason could be that--
and it's related to the fairness point--
is to the extent that education--
people are proud of education to the extent
there is a utility value that's akin to consumption.
Then education is a funny good.
Because it's at the same time an investment.
It makes you more productive.
And at the same time, something that you
enjoy for the sake of it.
And the type of things that you enjoy for the sake of it,
the richer you are, the more you can get--
the more you get.
So your car is going to be nicer if you're richer.
You're going to eat more candies if you're richer.
And you're going to go to the cinema and on vacation.
With education, likewise, as you become richer,
you might be able to afford more because you have enough to take
care of your basic necessities.
But then, as you afford more, you also
invest more in this valuable good.
So education being at the same time an investment good
and a consumption good creates a built-in unfairness
in the education choices because poorer kids will
be less educated than richer kids, therefore,
will become less productive, therefore less rich,
therefore their kid will become less productive and less rich
and so on.
So the combination of credit constraint and the fact
that, more importantly even, the fact that consumption--
that education is to some extent a consumption good
might create poverty traps where the poorer
people become poorer and poorer and the trajectory diverge.
So these are various arguments why you might--
the government might decide to finance
part or all of education.
Interestingly, all of these arguments
rely on empirical claims that we need to test.
For example, I haven't proven you
that there are these externality benefits do exist.

In practice, both rich and poor economy
tend to finance at least part of education level.
So this is the richer economy in the OECD.
And each point is the share of the education expenditure
that is shouldered by parents, at the primary level in blue,
the secondary level in green, and the tertiary level
in yellow.
So, in general, in rich economy, parents
pay very, very little of the public--
of the primary and secondary school costs.
So only parents who decide, for example,
to forego public schools and go to private school instead
need to pay.
So the level people have to pay on average is low.
And then, on the other hand, it's
when you go to university that you
start having to pay much more.
And there, too, it depends from country to country.
In France, where I come from, [INAUDIBLE]
pay very little of the cost of university.
Most universities are free or nearly free.
And in the US, of course, most universities are expensive.
And so, households pay a large cost-- a large share
of the cost of tertiary education.
In developing countries, it's more
of a mixed bag where, in general, households
pay a larger share of the cost of their education,
partly because even public schools have
school fees, partly because the public school--
people have abandoned the public schools
and go to private schools instead like we
saw for healthcare as well.
So, in general, households pay more for education
in developing countries.
So you noted that most people are in school.
And, yet, parents in developing countries
pay more for it relatively.
So that tells you how much they think education is valuable.
Another thing that's funny in a lot of developing countries
is that it is not primary education that
is relatively the cheaper for households, it's tertiary.
So you go to a system where education is expensive
the whole way through until you get to the very elite tertiary
education system where it becomes free.
So people pay a lot to basically get qualified
to go into very good schools where they
don't have to pay any more.
So that's totally regressive, meaning the richer
you are, the greater the transfer.
Because you get-- you have to pay a lot in the early level
to qualify for tertiary education,
and then you don't have to pay any more.
So that's an interesting setup of the way education system
are conceived or maybe not particularly conceived,
that the design is a bit haphazard.
And, often, it is because these tertiary schools were conceived
already in the colonial era as a way
to form an elite to run the country.
And so, they are very, very small in numbers,
but they are very inexpensive.
So people with merit get to go there.
But you can see the inequities that
are built in the system where only people who can afford
to pay primary and secondary, and therefore who are already
wealthy, get to go to tertiary for free.
PROFESSOR: The next question, once we agree that government
should pay for some or part of education, which
is, in fact, true in many countries of the world,
is should the government provide schooling?
So what's the difference between paying for education
and providing it?

Yes, [INAUDIBLE]?
STUDENT: I guess they incur a double cost
because it's like a non--
they create non-for-profit institutions, essentially,
because they're paying for people to go there
and they're also paying to sustain the school.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So the difference between paying for and providing--
so providing is the way that probably if you went to public
school, a good chance is you went to your local school,
which was free for you or your parents,
and was just run by the town or maybe by you're--
at the national level in some cases.
Depending on the country where you grew up.
But then there are other systems maybe that some of you
experienced where your education is still
partly or fully financed by the government,
but it's not provided by the government.

Did anybody, for example, went to a private school
with some extent of scholarship?

So that would be an example where
you get a scholarship, publicly-funded scholarship
to attend the private school that
can be at an individual level or there
can be voucher systems that tells their name,
that literally, people have a voucher that they can take
to the school of their choice.
Or in France, there is a whole network
of private school, parochial and non-parochial private schools
who are supported to a very, very large extent
by the government as long as they agree
to teach the curriculum that is being taught in public schools
as well.
So although that doesn't describe itself
as a voucher system, it is essentially
a voucher system where private schools
get paid to provide education.
And then you have charter schools,
which are common in the US, where someone--
a community or a company can decide to create a school,
commit to a particular curriculum that is approved,
and in exchange, get entirely funded by the city
on-- or by the local government on the education budget.
So there are all sorts of-- there is actually
a patchwork of systems.
And you find this patchwork of systems in all developing
countries.
And so in France, you have a public system,
but you have this parochial system
that's on a voucher system.
Chile relies almost essentially on private schools for which
students have a voucher.
Cote d'Ivoire very recently decided
that secondary education was going to be compulsory,
but then they discovered they didn't have
high schools to send the kids.
So instead, they gave every child a voucher
that they could take to any secondary school they wanted,
and secondary school emerged out of nowhere--
out of thin air, a whole market for secondary school emerged.
So there is a whole mix-up of--
and then there are private--
there are public schools that are financed largely by parents
in the form of school fees.
For example, secondary school in Ghana,
we are going to talk more about it today, are public,
but parents pay a lot.
So there is a whole mix-up.
So why should the--
so these are the alternative.
OK.
STUDENT: For your last point, was that through taxes?
Like areas where they pay for higher--
PROFESSOR: No, no, by fee.
They pay directly.
So someone always needs to pay.
So if it's not by--
if it's paid by the government at some place or the other,
it's taxes.
Could be local taxes or national taxes.
But in Ghana, parents pay fee, which are pretty large.
And they are not the whole cost, but they
are good part of the cost.
So they are public schools, but fee-paying public schools,
so the financing is mostly private.
So just to tell you that the model,
that if we have to have an education system,
it's a bunch of government schools.
In fact, in reality, there is a whole patchwork.
So why should the government--
we agree that-- or we-- that there
are good reasons why the government might
want to pay for a whole or part of the cost of schooling.
Why should they get in the business of running schools?
Seems like a bigger effort than actually providing it.
So paying for it, why should the government
possibly provide schools and not just pay for it?
Lucas?
STUDENT: They could teach the curriculum that they want,
and that, I guess, conforms to the society
that the leaders want.
PROFESSOR: So that's great.
So they could-- the government might
decide to provide schools because they
can be sure that the curriculum that is taught
is what they want.
Why couldn't they have a contract
with the private schools like we have
in France where the parochial school need
to teach the same curriculum?
STUDENT: I mean, I guess they could, but it's
a little bit less stable or--
I guess if they operate their own schools,
they have very clear--
they can make very clear goals, expectations,
and they have a lot more control than if they like hand it over
to a private school.
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So this is the key control, it's the key term here.
You can try and write a contract to have a curriculum,
but it is hard to write a complete contract
with all of the contingencies.

There is, in today's-- or yesterday's New York Times,
a very interesting article about--
Op-Docs about inpatient facilities for troubled teens.
Which explores exactly that, which
is partly privately, mostly publicly-funded
private facilities to take care of troubled teens and the very
bad treatment that kids receive there.
And that illustrates exactly this example,
which is it is pretty hard to write
a complete contract about what you need
to achieve in these schools.
So in this case of the facilities for troubled kids,
the facility's main objective is to not lose the kids in nature
or let them harm themselves or others.
So everything is geared to that, which leads to abuse
in the form of bad treatment and putting the kids in isolation
and so on, and at least they don't--
kids don't escape.
What's not written in the contract
is that what constitutes treatment for these children.
So that's an extreme situation, in which
you'll find in prisons as well.
There are some privately-operated prisons.
And it's pretty difficult to write a complete contract.
So you might insist that the prisons don't escape,
but then there are periodically stories of abuse,
et cetera in those prisons because when there is a one
dimension, which is incentivizing
the contract and not the rest, you might become--
neglect the rest.
So this is a type of work that Bengt Holmstrom, who
won the Nobel Prize a few years ago,
has developed theoretically here in the department.
So the same thing might happen with school,
that it's pretty hard to write a complete contract.
Even school for regular kids, you just--
you might be able to be clear on what you want for math,
but if you go back to [INAUDIBLE] point
about a common culture, it's harder
to enforce what constitutes a common culture.
And so you might decide that you want to provide the schools
and not just run them.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess I have a quick question about the control
aspect.
Like, how can we say that it's better
getting more control over the government
[INAUDIBLE] versus just [INAUDIBLE] spending
[INAUDIBLE] less [INAUDIBLE] the incentives between the teachers
and the government?
PROFESSOR: That's a great, great question, which is my next one,
which is, why you might want to avoid--
why government might possibly want to not get
into the business of providing schools.
And it relates on how difficult it
would be to control the private agents
and to write the contract fully and monitor
that the contract is enforced.
Rather than the control, you can have on your own employees
and the fact that governments are not necessarily
very good at running anything.
And it's hard to give incentives in the public sectors
and the public sectors become large and hard to manage and so
on.
So of course, economists love to say bad things
about the government, so I'm not going
to insist too much on that, but that's basically the trade-off,
is that a privately-provided operator is going
to have very clear idea of what their incentives are and are
going to try and do the best within their budget
to get there.
Whereas the incentive in the public sector
are a little bit more mixed up, and it
might be difficult to give teachers,
for example, the right level of incentive to work hard
and you may have to pay them much more and so on.
It might become much more expensive to provide
public education than to provide comparable private education.
Angela and then Julie.
STUDENT: The advantage when the government
provides public schooling is that there's
a baseline that the government not only pays for, but provides
for as well, and doesn't leave much leverage
for different private agents to intervene.
Having a market for schools is troubling simply
because if everyone pays for it and decides to,
for example, use a voucher, there
might be different interventions or some parents who are richer
and decide to fund that school more.
So in the end, I think in the long-run, the services
that different schools offer might differ simply
because it's not the government providing for them,
so ensuring that there's a baseline that everyone has.
And also, in terms of locally, like residential places,
if all of the people living in that same community
go to that same school, like--
whatever, it's-- if the--
The advantage of government providing schooling
is that there's a baseline that everyone has access
to regardless of the school, regardless of what everyone.
PROFESSOR: Great.
This would imply, though, that if that was the desire,
to create a uniformity in what it's being delivered,
this would imply that people do not have the right
to opt out of the system.
And there are very few examples of where that's the case.
So in Soviet Union, you were not allowed
to go to private school, there was
only public school and everybody did go to the public school.
But in many settings, private schools are an option,
so that problem never really goes away.
But for example, in health care, in Canada,
in many of the provinces in Canada,
because the same can apply-- the same debate
you can have about health care.
You can have a publicly-funded privately provided health care.
In Canada, you don't-- in many provinces,
you don't have the right to get supplemental health insurance.
It is what it is.
You have to get your health care from the public service.
So it's not-- and Canada is not the Soviet Union.
So that's a more extreme position
to say the government should provide all of education.
And then you have the trade-offs of how well you
can do it versus how to ensure uniformity versus people
can choose their education, but it's within a timeline,
so people have to at least learn a few things.
Again, quoting from The New York Times,
there was an article a few weeks ago about yeshivas.
Some yeshivas in New York actually
are not teaching English or math beyond a very basic level
and are publicly funded.
Illustrating either the fact that the American culture is
very permissive or the fact that it's
hard to enforce a contract.
In such a world where it's hard to enforce a contract,
then you might like to have more public schools.
And in a world where it's hard to get your teachers to do
anything, then you might want to have more private school.
So my objective is certainly not to tell you
this is how it should be because it really depends on all
of these things, but what we have to think about,
what a policymaker has to think about when they think
about designing their system.
Yeah, Julie?
STUDENT: It seems like if you centralize the schooling,
the schools could get really, really good.
I guess there's like--
it goes both ways, though, because sometimes competition
is good.
So I could see a situation where if it's all
run by the government or like a good percentage
is run by the government, then you
can put a lot of funding into making the best curriculum
and using it everywhere and just getting
really good at making schools.
But on the other hand, maybe having
competing schools where there's demand and different schools
get the vouchers and stuff, the competition
could like promote growth or something.
So I think you just have to test it and see
which is better, but like--
PROFESSOR: Great.
So that's another very interesting trade-off.
The other very interesting trade-off
is the benefits of scale, that if a government system runs
all of the schools, they can invest
into having not just excellent curriculum,
but excellent teacher training and excellent supervision
and excellent way of organizing the system and so on.
Versus competition, might align each schools better
to each community's desire, might provide--
might give the right incentive to the agents
and so on, and then these two might potentially be--
this is a trade-off.
So we'll have to see again empirically how it looks like.
So I'm not even going to give you
much food for thought for how to think about this--
each of these questions because they are very
context-dependent, but just to put it in your radar screen,
that the answer to this question of how
much the government should pay for education and at what level
and whether the government should provide education
are not obvious.

PROFESSOR: So now, let's spend a little bit
of time discussing of whether there
are any benefits of education.
A lot of our conversation was predicated on the fact
that our big list of benefits were in fact, benefits.
So if you look at the country level data,
it's pretty obvious that there is a strong correlation
between, for example, this is economic growth at the country
level, and how many years of education.
This is actually test scores, cognitive test scores.
You can see a pretty strong correlation between the two.
So places where people are more educated and remembered
something, because they have higher cognitive test scores.
We get the growth is larger.

We discussed also, about the non-monetary costs.
So child mortality is one of them.
You can see a very strong negative correlation
between your average years of women and the reproductive age
bracket and child mortality very, very strong.

So all of that makes, no doubt.
You mentioned politics.
You also see a correlation between whether a country is
a liberal democracy.
So Afghanistan is not one.
Australia is one.
The US is one, and how much education there
was in the 1970s.
So if in the past, a country was more educated,
today they are more likely to be a democracy.
By now, you should to be able to beware
of such cross-country correlations.
So do these graphs, showing correlation between growth
and education, between child mortality and education,
politics and education, do they necessarily indicate
the causal effect of education?
What could go wrong with them?

Lucas?
STUDENT: It could be that richer countries have more schools
and like can make schooling mandatory.
And that doesn't have any effect on their economic growth.
It's the fact that they're rich and can invest or whatever,
that actually fuels their economic growth.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it could be going backwards.
It could be that a rich country can now afford
to build all of these schools.
Or a rich country feels that even if you anticipate
future growth, you can say, well,
the country is going to grow.
So we need all these educated people.
Let's build a lot of schools.
So it could be growth that cause schooling and not the other way
around.
Or it could be an omitted variable
that countries that are better run
have better health and better schools
and better trains and better factories and grow faster.
But it's not that education, per se, causes the growth.
Yeah?
STUDENT: In the case of education,
if the externalities and the benefits we saw
were more due to proximate causes due to schooling,
would education still be considered the ultimate cause,
and thus be the causal?
PROFESSOR: I think so.
Yeah, I think legitimately, as long as it's the lever,
you can push even if it starts like a whole Rube Goldberg
machine of stuff, but at the end it causes growth, I'll take it.
So I'm not concerned about the fact
that the effect might be indirect.
But I am concerned about the fact
that some things can be many things.
So for example, you could press on the education lever,
and it presses.
And you can not press on this lever
without pressing on another one.
That also affects economic growth.
That's what we might be worried about.
Or the very fact that you can afford to press on the lever
is because you're rich enough.
So at a country level, we can make this argument for growth.
We can make this argument for politics.
Only Democratic country will want
to invest in their citizens, because why would you
want an educated citizenry if you want to remain the boss?
You might be afraid, if anything, of educated people.
So the correlation between politics and education
could well go the other way.
And of course, child mortality would
be lower in places that in general, have
good public infrastructure.
And good public infrastructure would also mean good schools.
So all for these reasons, these coalitions
are not so informative.
One could do the same thing at the individual level.
So I can repeat this the same graph at the individual level.
This is data from Indonesia.
That's actually coming from one of my papers,
which is also referenced in the book.
I'm not going to discuss much of that paper,
but here is just a descriptive estimate, which
is how much people, now it's individual adult,
how much are they making as a function of their year
of education in logs, with education for someone who has
0 year of education earnings?
These are wage earnings normalized at 0.
And then for each year, how much more they earn.
And you can see that for each year of education,
you earn a bit more.
If you finish secondary school, you earn much more.
And then, it's not clear that college is that
helpful beyond the first years.
So that's the equivalent, the descriptive correlation
at the individual level.
And then, I'm going to show you the same thing
for maternal mortality.
This is from a paper in The Lancet
that uses data from 114 countries which
have demographic and health surveys,
and compare the mortality, child mortality at different levels
in the neonatal period.
So it's a month, between one month and one year
and then until 5.
And this is the hazard of dying.
So you can see that people who are mothers,
who are the most educated, their kids are least likely to die.
And it's almost like a doubling for--

so it's almost a doubling of child mortality.
It's between the highly educated moms and the not well educated
moms.
This is relative risk.
So it's saying it's lower the bar the better.
So if a mom has zero education, this is 1.
If she has six years of education, it's moved to 0.9.
If she has 16 years of education, it moves to 0.75.
So it's a difference in 25% in the chance
of dying at one month.
Then we find also some effect of paternal.
Then essentially going here, something at five years.
Yeah, Angela?
STUDENT: Just out of curiosity, on the slide before,
the returns to education, why are they
decreasing at specific points?
Because there are-- as you would expect,
it goes up all the time.
And then it's between ninth grade and others.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so what do you think happens between 9 and 10?

I guess I need to give you one more
information about the education system in Indonesia.
You have primary school until grade 5,
middle school from 5 to 9, and then high school 10 and 11.
And then it's college.
So 10, 11, 12 is high school.
And then from then on, is college.
Yes, Evan?
STUDENT: If you're starting high school at 10, but then
for whatever reason you don't complete it,
it's like you have some other circumstance,
in your life that's preventing you
from earning that high income.
But if you complete it, your life's
probably at a pretty good track to make
the income that you expect.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, and so if we continue that, the people who
do one year of education and one year of high school and stop,
these circumstances that stop them,
they anticipate that they are the one that
continue to help them later on.
Yes, so it could be that.
So it could be that, who would stop high school after just one
year?
Is there someone who has had a problem,
maybe a health problem, maybe their parents went bankrupt,
and they couldn't pay anymore.
This problem could continue to help them in the future.
Or there could be a bad signaling effect
of being the type of people who drops out.
So in one case, it's the treatment effect,
of it's literally bad for your earnings,
because you send a bad signal of doing
just one year of education.
And in the other case, it's an event proposal,
it's the selection effect.
More generally, the selection effect
could explain a lot of this pattern, which
is the people who can afford more education can also
afford better financial circumstances for their kids.
And that's why they make more money.
So the kids could be more faster on their feet
and all that, which is helpful for education,
would be helpful in a job.
Or the kids could just be richer and have access
to more opportunities, which again, would make them better
in a job.
PROFESSOR: So this issue that even at the individual level,
the correlation between education, and earnings,
or child mortality, et cetera might not reflect causal effect
is something which is, of course, very much
in people's minds has been the topic of a lot of studies.
In [INAUDIBLE] economics, we discuss
some of my work, which was trying to use the Indonesia
experiment to get leverage, to get
[INAUDIBLE] on whether education increases.
But what I'm going to talk about today
is a more recent project that looks at--
that actually exploits an experiment
that we conducted in Ghana, which
started before many of you were born, or all of you were born.
Which is the Ghana [INAUDIBLE] school project.
So Ghana is one of the countries where
all of these debates that we had,
discussion we had about whether or not education
should be publicly provided or not, very intense.
There is a pro secondary health, free secondary [INAUDIBLE]
school camp and an anti one.
On the pro case, it's like, oh, many kids cannot afford it.
The anti camp is saying, well, but many kids can afford it.
And if secondary high school is free,
then it's basically a transfer to all of these children,
all of these parents who would be able to pay for it.
So this is expensive and we could use the money
better elsewhere.
In 2016, they launched the pro secondary school
camp won the election.
In 2017, they launched the program.
But the debate continues to go on,
with the opposition putting it back for discussion
at every single election cycle.
Our project started before that.

So this is the effect that you're getting,
the number of kids that entered school in 2017.
But our project started in 2008, way
before secondary education was free.
And we identified a set of students
who had been admitted to specific schools.
So in Ghana, the way it works is that education
is free until the end of junior high school, so until grade 9.
And at the end of junior high school,
you take an exam, which determines whether or not
you can go to secondary school at all.
And if you can go, you're matched
to a specific public secondary school based
on your desire plus your test scores,
with a central algorithm.
So we went to a bunch of schools.
And we asked them in the first trimester of the year,
were there are any of the kids that
were admitted to the school and were
placed into that school had, in fact, gone.
And in Ghana, it's frequently the case
that people are placed in a school,
but they can't go because they don't have the money.
And they might actually join later in January,
once they managed to put the money together.
It's not uncommon.
So we went in the first quarter of the year
and identified these 2,000 students,
did a survey with them.
And then 682 of them were randomly
selected to receive a four-year secondary school scholarship.
The scholarship covers the full tuition
and the fees for these students for four years.
So they can't go to boarding school,
but all of the schools we sampled from
were these schools.
So the average cost is about $500 per child.

That's roughly the timeline.
In 2008, they wrote their exam.
In May 2008, they wrote their exam.
July 2008, they graduated.
In August, they were admitted.
In September, the school year starts.
By December, they were sampled.
If they are not enrolled yet, in January,
they were randomized into treatment and control.
And if they were eligible and they wanted to go,
they could go.
If they were not eligible but found some other money,
they could also go, so if they didn't win the scholarship.
So it's not randomizing senior high school.
It's randomizing a chance to--
an extra chance to go to senior high school.
By 2012, if they had never repeated the class,
they could graduate from senior high school.
And from then on, we continued to sample them, actually now,
till 2022.
We are still following them.
So the first result is in order for this
to be interesting from our point of view
because we want to use that to look
at the benefits of education.
I cannot compare the educated and uneducated
because, obviously, even within the educated and uneducated are
different.
Because some kids who didn't get a scholarship still
found a way to pay for school.
And those kids are different.
So we are going to compare all the outcomes in the lottery
losers, also about 1,400 kids, to the lottery winners.
So the first thing I need to show you
is to show you that, in fact, the lottery winners are
more likely to attend school.
And this is what we find.
You can see that the lottery losers, still, 45% of them
managed to graduate secondary school,
suggesting that they found the money from elsewhere.
So they might have found another scholarship.
The employers of their parents might come up.
Or their family might pull the money together.
So about half of them, even though they were not
enrolled for lack of money in the first trimester,
found their way to secondary school.
But for the kids who got the scholarship,
it increased by 28 percentage points.
So if you add 45% to 28%--
you're better at arithmetic than me-- that's almost 83, 83%.
So 83% of the lottery winners do go and complete
secondary school.
So that's people who were very happy to get this and took it
and went to school.
But 45% would have done it anyways.
OK?
Make sense?
So this is for the boys, for everyone.
And this is very similar for the boys and for the girls.
The boys are more likely to go to school anyway,
50% versus 40%.
But the differential effect is the same.
So on average, the losers have completed
about two years of education, that correspond to about 40%
of the four-year education, so the people who go complete.
And the winners have about a little
over a year extra education.
Does that make sense?
[INAUDIBLE], you look puzzled.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].

PROFESSOR: Now we can look at the different--
so this was the impact of secondary education
up till the secondary level.
Now let's look at tertiary education,
so whether people go to university.
And now I'm showing you the mean here of the treatment group.
So by 2019, 15% of the students have ever
enrolled in a tertiary program, so universities,
or teacher training college, or nurse training college,
in the control group.
So 15% of the students have gone to a tertiary.
So if you remember that about 40% of them
have gone to school, it's about 1
in 3 among the one who completed senior high school.
And there is an extra 4 percentage
point among the lottery winners, which is entirely due to girls.
So the girls are less likely to go to tertiary school
in the control group, but they have a larger treatment effect.
So 12% of the girls in the control group go to school.
And 18% of the girls in the control group
go to school, 12 plus 7.
Makes sense, 12% plus 7%, 18%?
For the boys, it's 18% plus nothing, 0.005.
So it's also 18%.
So basically, the scholarship allowed girl
to catch up in term of tertiary education.
Ah, I forgot to add something very important.
It's whether or not they learn something at school.
So we administered, in 2013, tests based loosely
on the PISA test, which is used across the entire OCD
to measure what people know in math,
and science, and language.
And we find significant improvement in how much
they know after four years of education, which is reassuring.
They are more likely to complete secondary school.
They've learned something in secondary school.
Interestingly, we found this even people
are assigned to-- their schools are assigned by category.
They are the top school, the middle school,
and the not very good schools.
Even in a not very good school, they still
have positive treatment effect.
So all of these schools increase the stock of knowledge
by about 0.25 standard deviation of the test scores.
Now, we talked about benefits of education.
One benefit could be better jobs, different type of jobs,
and higher earnings.
And the other benefits are in terms of child health
and all of that.
So in order to see the benefits in terms of earnings,
we had to wait till the children become young adult
and start working.
So for this project, you had to be very patient because first
they had to finish school.
And then we have to continue to follow them, and follow
them, and follow them, and follow them.
And if I had taught this class to you
even last year, I would have told you
I do not find an effect, a difference
in the earnings of the kids.
By 2022, we do find that people among if we
take all kids, people in the treatment groups
are earn 300 Ghana cedis more on the basis of 2,600,
so a little over 10% more, closer to 12% more,
than people and the control group.
Until 2022, the impact were not significant.
So finally, by 2022, they earned more money, but it's about 12%
more, corresponding to four years of education.
So it is not a gigantic rate of return to education,
on average.
What is interesting, though, is you
see that they are more likely to have a job with benefits,
so more likely to be employed with a pension, and health
benefits, and so on, and in particular, more likely
to be working for the government.
So for the mean in the control group is about 8%
of the children.
[INAUDIBLE] adults now work in the government.
And in the treatment group, it's moved to 15%--
sorry, 12%, from 8% to 12%.
So that's a 50% increase.
But the probability was low to start with.
So in percentage point, that's not very large
it's a large increase but in percentage point.
It's not very large.
So most of the earnings.
And then you also see that people are less
likely to be self-employed.
So the self employment rate is 36%
in the control group and move to 30% in the treatment group.
So what we seem to have is people
shifting from more insecure type of jobs
to more secure type of job, but not in huge numbers.
And for everyone else who doesn't do this shifting,
it doesn't make a big difference in how productive they are
or how much they earn, which is why, on average, the earning
effects are not that large.

PROFESSOR: So this is for earnings.
So if you stopped at earnings, you might think, well, it's OK.
It increases-- four years of secondary school
increased education, increased earnings a little bit,
but not tremendously.
A 12% increase is maybe not that large for four years
of education.
I mean, it's for one fourth of the kids.
So for on average, one year of education.
But we can look at the other benefits now.
So part of the reason why these benefits are low
is that this financial benefit is, of course,
once the kids are educated, and they
start being in the labor market, the labor market has
to have a job for these people.
And the economy in Ghana at the time--
and now, of course, it's even worse.
But the economy of Ghana over that period
was went a little bit from crisis to crisis.
So it was perhaps not the most conducive labor market
for people to use these new skills
that they acquired in schools.
So the effect of education on earnings
is maybe less of a done deal than we might have expected.
Now, let's look at the other type of things.
One is, I think Lucas mentioned the possibility
of delayed childbearing for women.
And, in fact, this is what you find here.
The woman in the control group, at every year,
even starting in 2009 when they are still in school,
but certainly by 2013, 2015, '16, '17 are--
the women and the control group are
more likely to have had a kid--
to have started childbearing.
So if you went to school in 2018,
it means by 2013 you're 17 years old.
So you are still a teenager.
You're less likely-- you're probability to have
a child is 8% point lower if you're in the treatment
group, 9% here, 10% here.
And then it starts converging.
And by 2022, the treatment group catches up
to have at least one child, although there
are fewer children total.
So the idea that, interestingly, almost none of these children
are wanted, as people say.
Did you want to have a kid at the time?
And they're like, no.
So this is a reduction not only in the number of children
but number of unwanted pregnancy, which creates,
of course, welfare issues for the mom
and for the children themselves.
Second important result is child mortality.
So, fortunately, most of the children who were born--
so now our kids--
these teenagers are not teenagers anymore.
They almost all have children.
So we have a whole sample of children--
most of them fortunately have survived
until we observed them.
But 5% of them have died in the control group.
So you can see the survival rate at any age
is 95%, with 96% at one year and 94.9 at three years.
And that's a 5% child mortality rate.
In the treatment group, the kids is 2.4% more likely
to be alive, that means 2.4% less likely to be dead.
So it's a reduction in child mortality
by half for winning the scholarship,
so for a chance of having gone to secondary school of only
about 25% larger.
So it's a very large impact which
you start seeing at one year and starts
even more at three years.
That's by 2019.
2022, the results are similar.
21% increase in the probability that the child is alive.
And 20-- mainly driven by survival till three years.
And no impact on the boys at all.
So there is no impact on the children of the boys.
All of the impact is coming from the children of the girls.
And the third result is a cognitive scores.
So this we did with the--
working with the child psychologist at Harvard
called Liz Spelke, who is a Director of the Child
Development Lab, where they do all sorts of fun studies.
I'm going to show you some other examples of those studies
later today, where the kids are playing
all sorts of games, et cetera.
So she developed a series of child age-appropriate,
culture-appropriate, context-appropriate cognitive
tests for these kids.
And we test the kids in a very narrow age window
to control for the fact that the control kids tend to be older.
And what you see is that looking-- so we test them
either at 18 months, three years, five years, or seven
years.
At 18 months and three years, we don't see much of an effect
yet.
At five years, the students-- the kids of the winners
have a 0.3 standard deviation higher test scores.
So it's in standard deviation.
So think of moving from the median
to the 75th percentile of the distribution roughly.
And by 7.47 standard deviation-- so
think of that as moving till an even higher percentile
in the distribution.
So these are large effect.
Again, remember, it's a chance of about 25%
chance increase in the chance of completing secondary school.
So if you multiply it by four, it's
almost two standard deviation of gain for the winners.
Looking at the children of the male, zero impact.
So that's the one study on the benefits of education, which
is perhaps the most robust that I know at this point because
of the randomization taking place a long time ago
and the ability to follow the kids--
of the kids up to today, and to follow their own learning,
and their forgetting the whole trajectory of what
it is to get an education.
And you can see, if we are looking just
at the monetary benefits of education,
it might not be worth it financially
for government to finance education,
just in term of monetary benefits.
But if you now take into account the child mortality benefits
and you value each life as its price for a statistical value
of life, then it becomes a great investment
from the point of view of the government
because the cost per life saved ends up being much,
much lower than the value of a statistical year of life
as we are using in general calculation.
So it seems that-- so it becomes suddenly a very valuable
proposition to finance education.
Moreover, you can compare how much
it costs you to save a life to how much it costs you by,
for example, subsidizing immunization
with lentils or with cash, or paying for bed nets,
or paying for prophylactic treatment of malaria.
And it is more expensive, but not by that much.
It is in the same order of magnitude
to pay for scholarship just in term [? of girl ?] survival.
So including this non-earnings benefit completely
changes the story.
Of course, there is an interesting puzzle
of why it's only the mother's education that matters.
So do you have suggestions for why it's only the mother's
education that matters?

Yeah.
STUDENT: It may be they're the ones who
are primarily responsible for the upbringing of the children.
So they pass on more of their, I guess, children are at home
and they would just naturally learn from the mother more?
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So the mothers end up-- so there are several things here.
It's one, the mother end up being the primary caregiver.
And when you look at mechanism for this increase in education,
the way it works is, it's not that the kids are
more likely to be enrolled.
It's not that they live in much better material condition.
The main mechanism we seem to find
is that the caregiver is spending more time
talking to the kids, and sharing books with the kids,
and giving them permanent stimulation.
And so, that happens--
that's the educated mom.
Now, with the boys, they could go and, because they
are educated, marry a more educated mother
or woman who would become a more educated mother and caregiver.
But, in fact, they don't.
So, interestingly, when we look at the partner of these kids,
the partner of the educated girls
are themselves more educated boys than in the control group.
But the partner of the scholarship winners
among the boys are not more educated women.
So the women go for what's called
assortative matching, which is if they are more educated
themselves, their partner is also more educated,
but the boys do not.
So that's one of the reasons why it's the female parent who
is the caregiver, and educating the boys
doesn't give them access to more educated caregivers,
or they don't choose more educated caregivers.
PROFESSOR: So how do parents choose education level
for their children?
We're not going to spend a huge amount of time on that.
But what are the types of things that a parent will
take into account when they're in that calculation, when
they think about educating their kids?

Yep.
STUDENT: Expected returns.
PROFESSOR: The expected returns, financial and non-financial.
And what else?

On the one hand, there is the return.
Lucas?
STUDENT: I think there might be some social pressure that's
there.
PROFESSOR: Social pressure could be
a reason where you pick an education level that's
not the one you want.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Whatever they can afford.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, the cost.
So it's both whether you can afford it
and whether I want to afford it.
So returns and costs are the two things that matters.
So in the cost category, you have the distance
to school, the direct cost, whether or not
there are scholarships to offset some of this scholarship.
Conditional cash transfer is, in a sense, a negative cost.
It's money that, in some countries,
in particular in all of Latin America,
some cash transfers that poor families get
are conditional on kids attending regularly.
So it creates a negative cost to go to school
because you need to go to school to get the scholarship,
to get the cash transfer.
And this can offset opportunity cost, which
is if you are not in school, you could be working, for example.
Balancing that is Astrid's point about school.
Another negative cost of school is that it's also
child care for the child.
And then the other thing is return.
So the question here you might ask is,
is it really true that people are paying attention
to the return to education?
So there, I think it's Olivia who mentioned this experience.
Do you want to talk about the back office processing
operation in India?
I don't remember it exactly.
But I think what happened was they were saying, like,
oh, if you're educated, you can work at this office.
And then the parents are educating more girls
because they saw that educating them
had some sort of direct return.
Exactly, it's exactly what happened.
So here, the puzzle is on-- the game
is like, how do we create exogenous variation, variation
that's random, in the returns to education?
And the way they did it is by saying, well, in Delhi,
all around Delhi, there are these BPO offices, or back
office processing operations.
So it's the people whom you call if you have something
you need with your credit card.
And someone calls you and says, I am John.
And I'm always like, you're not John.
And I am not Robert, either, because we each talk
with our respective accent.
In fact, once I was calling about the internet
of my friend, Rohini.
And the person on the phone tells me they are John.
And I said, and I am Rohini.
And then we both laugh because clearly, he wasn't John.
And I wasn't Rohini either.
But anyway, so these people talk to you
on the phone to interpret image, X-rays, that kind of stuff,
any work that can be done remotely.
So Rob Jensen, who is an economist now at Yale,
ran an experiment where he teamed up with a BPO
to organize recruitment campaigns
in randomly-selected villages.
Within 100km or so of Delhi.
So in order to work in the BPO, you need to be educated.
So people would realize that, oh,
there is value in educating the kids because then they
can work in this BPO.
And then what they find is that if you look at the younger
girls, even though relatively few of the older girls
went, so it doesn't create a direct income
effect for the families, but focusing on the younger girls,
their parents were more likely to keep them in school
or to enroll them in training.
They also fed them more.
Their BMI was a little bit higher.
And these kids also actually married later
and had fewer children down the line.
So this suggests that people are sensitive about return
to education.
One caveat here is that although they
are sensitive to return to education,
they are not very good at anticipating
what they might be.
So remember the Ghana experiment?
We found that the increase in probability to get a government
job was about three percentage points for the lottery winners.
Multiply that by 4 because the increase in probability
of going to school is 25%, so that's a 12 percentage point,
but the parents think that if you complete secondary school,
you're very, very, very likely to get a government job.
And as a result, they think that--
[COUGHS] excuse me.
As a result, they think that the returns to education are huge.
So do you remember the increase we found in Ghana on earnings?
More or less, what was it?
10%.
About 10%, yes, multiplied by 4 because it's
the increase corresponding to 25 percentage,
about one year of education.
That's 40%.
That's not bad for secondary.
But the parents think it's going to be 275%.
So the parents have a completely misguided view
of what the returns to education are.
And that might explain why kids are spending out in schools,
is that parents have completely bought in education
as a way of ensuring a better future to their children.
Unfortunately, these jobs are actually few and far between.
So even though you have more kids
to complete secondary school, the jobs
don't appear out of thin air.
So they are all competing for the same number of jobs.
And they are not very likely to get them.
And as a result, one of the reasons
why the effect on earnings are in fact low
is because too many children, once they graduate, wait
and hope that they could get into tertiary education
now, which now, they understand is
the ticket to a government job.
So in 2013, 43% of the control group
was hoping to get into a secondary school,
into tertiary.
So basically, the entire population
of the control group who got access to secondary school
wanted to continue.
And there is a 24 percentage point increase
in the treatment group.
In 2017, four years later, still almost 49% of them
planned to apply to tertiary.
And there is a 15 percentage point difference.
In 2019, still 36% of students of the control group
planned to apply to tertiary school.
So there is still a huge hope that something comes up
and they get access to a tertiary education
spot, which is the key, they think,
to get into the government.
And so that's a little bit-- that ends up,
this kind of looming of the government job,
not just as a way of earnings, but I
think it's Samantha who mentioned that
as a way of working a very comfy job, in a sense.
You don't have to work very hard.
And you don't have to be in the field.
And you have security and employment and all that.
That attracts.
That has so much allure that, for some of the education
graduates, it ends up going into education
for the wrong reason because of misleading opportunities,
and therefore a waste of talents.
Once these people are educated, they just
wait around and hope that they can get into government job
at some point.
PROFESSOR: In the last 20 minutes,
I want to talk to you about education quality.
Because I have told you about the fact
that kids are in school, I have told you about the fact
that they are absent, but I haven't told you much
about what they were learning.
In fact, the one slide about what
they were learning done on the Ghana study,
I didn't even show you.
And the problem is that they don't learn very much.
This is data for India, so let me remind to you
the same thing we saw in India.
Almost everyone is enrolled.
97% of kids in the age 6 to 14 are enrolled in school.
But the presence rate is not that large.
So in the north of India, you have 50% to 59%
of children present.
In the south, it's higher.
And the problem is that they are not learning very much.
So this is data from up till 2016.
It didn't get better after that.
And of course, then, there was a pandemic.
So it got worse temporarily.
But you have to remember one thing about the education
quality in India, and it's not very different in the rest
of the developing world.
About half of children who are completing
grade 5 who are aged--
who are in grade 5 are able to read at the grade 2 level.
So about half of the children can read a simple paragraph
and make sense of it.
So that's not a very good performance
for an education system.
In arithmetic, maybe closer to the MIT student mind.
In standard 5, half of the children
can do without mistake these two-digit subtraction
with carry over.

26% can do a division by a single digit.
See the funny sign for division?
Only 26% of them can do a division like that.
Even by the end, they finish grade 8, only 44% of the kids
can do this division.
So the education system doesn't produce very much at all.
Just so you don't think it's just India,
a team at the World Bank put together
a very nice data set combining many, many, many, many test
scores and putting them on a single dimension.
So what they do, basically, is take common test for example,
the test I showed you for reading
and mathematics is called the ASER test in India.
Pratham in India has done it for many years.
So many countries do the ASER test and do other things.
So you can use the ASER as a crosswalk
to put all of the test roughly on the same magnitude
to have a unified measure of what children
know at a given point in time.
And what you see is that it's very strongly
correlated with income level of the country.
So in a poorer country, learning levels are very low.
So India is not particularly bad compared
to other poorer economy countries in Africa, DRC,
Ghana, Togo, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Yemen,
are all even lower, are poorer, on their achievement level
are even lower.
So if you think of India as half the kid can read,
half of the kid who finished primary school
can read at the level of the beginning of primary school,
in Cote d'Ivoire, that's closer to 0.
Very, very low achievement level.
So that is a problem that now is vastly recognized.
There is an emphasis in organizations like the World
Bank or USAID on the quality of education
and on learning outcomes.
And it's important, of course.
However, some sense the problem is even worse, because not
only schools are not teaching very much,
they are also not able to recognize, to certify,
and to leverage knowledge that is there in the system.
So let me give you two examples of that, both from my work.
One is work that I did with Liz Spelke, my friend, psychologist
at Harvard.
And in fact, both of them are joined with her.
But one is an experiment.
So what we did, what Liz does is mostly to try to think how
and to understand how little kids learn mathematics,
and it turns out that all children,
barring extreme disability, have intuitive
knowledge of mathematics before they
are exposed to any symbols.
So for example, you can compare more or less,
you can compare-- you can do some visual form analysis.
If I show you graphs with all of the lines
are parallel, and one, they're not,
you intuitively will know that the one where they are not
is different, even if you have never heard of a parallel.
Or if I show you different shapes with different number
of sides, you will know how they are different, and so on.
So that's one thing we know.
Second thing we know is that kids who in childhood are
better at this kind of test also are better
at math down the line.
They get a better SAT score in mathematics.
What we don't know is whether training--
we also know that this intuitive knowledge of mathematics
can be trained.
What we don't know is there is a causal effect-- is there
a causal effect of training intuitive mathematics
on later performance, or it just happens
to be an omitted variable that the kids who
are good at informal mathematics are also
good at formal mathematics.
So I contacted Liz several years ago
because I was interested in seeing whether we could help
the kids do better in school by sending them
to an excellent preschool and teaching them stuff
to get them ready in preschool.
So based on what she knew about the importance
of this intuitive knowledge, she designed
a curriculum of math games.
I'll show you some examples.
Then we did a study where we first did
some baseline, then we--
they played games for about three months,
and then we had several end lines, one
after six months, one after one year, one after 18 years,
and we did one, completed one after five years recently.
So the games are that kind of games.
For example, you have a red basket
and a blue basket and a card, and you have
to put it in the right place.
Bravo, Julie, 1 point.
Julie.
Tada!
So this is correct.
This one goes here.
If you turn the card back, it gives you the answer.
And it actually also gives you a numerical representation,
so, certainly, there is a bit of numerical numbers.
So that's one example.
Another one is this visual form analysis
that's much harder to figure out which is-- here, you have
to say, what's the odd one out?
What's the one that doesn't belong with the rest?
You don't know, so I'm going to guess that it's this one.
No, it's not this one.
So you have a guess, now I had my guess.
The middle top.
Yes.
We get the smiley face.
So there's this kind of games.
There is a sort of race to the top.
And then, so the series of math games
like that of progressive difficulty,
not introducing numbers.
And then, we add social games, which
have exactly the same structure, but they are all
about emotions.
For example, this one, who is happier in here?
And this one, who is the odd one out?
So the odd one out is that one because she looks grim
faced when the other one are happy.
So why did we introduce this social game?
Why do we have just-- why don't we just
compare math game to control?

Yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: Precisely.
Because it's a set of very informal preschool,
in the absence of math game, they might not do very much,
or maybe they might do great things
and we are taking them from these great things
with the math games.
The point is that for a while, they're
playing these games where their wheels are cranking
in a particular fashion, and we want
to make sure that it's the effect of that
and not something else.
That's why we had the social games.
So here's the first finding.
The first finding, before we even do the experiments,
is that the kids progress in the games at the same speed
at the kids in Cambridge who are children of graduate student
and assistant professor and postdocs at Harvard who
are testing these games-- whom these games were piloted for.
So the kids in India, these very poor kids in slums in Delhi,
they learn and like those games just as well.
That's the first finding.
The second finding is that they, by doing that,
they become much better at this non-symbolic sort of tasks,
and it's really the effect of the math.
This is compared math to control.
It's much larger difference than comparing a social game
to control.
And these effects are actually quite persistent.
Even 18 months later, they are still
better at this non-symbolic math.
The third one is, while they were still in preschool,
there is a small effect also on symbolic mass,
so the ability to recognize numbers
and to say what is-- to recognize shapes, for example.
But the third fact is that at later end
line, once they have reached schools,
this is completely gone.
So once they go to school and they
are supposed to start really learning those numbers
and shapes and all that, there is
zero impact of the experiments.
Which means that although the math game really
enhance their ability to understand and think
about math, once they went to school,
the schools basically squashed it out of their system
very quickly.
So the first conclusion is that, well, it
was not a success from the point of view
of having an intervention that really helps
the kids, because it doesn't help them
once they get to school.
But the second conclusion is that schools are not
able to leverage this increased mathematical ability.
Schools basically continue to move on.
The fact that they have kids who know a bit more math to start
with, should have more ability on math,
they are not able to do anything with them.
PROFESSOR: The second example of the schools being
unable to leverage the math that exists in the world
is even more egregious because it should be more visible,
and kids should have been used to that
is, if you've ever been in a developing country in a city,
you'll see sometimes there are kids
who are selling in market--
not babies, like teenagers selling in markets.
Sometimes they go to school in the morning.
They sell in the afternoon.
Sometimes they've now stopped schools,
or they do that in the summer.
But you see a lot of kids selling on markets.
And if you have seen them, you would also
notice that they are very good at it.
They can compute very quickly and give you your change.
So I was always puzzled as to one,
do they really compute, or do they know things by heart?
And they just have a schedule in their mind
of how much 100 grams of tomato, 200 grams, 250, 300, 500,
the common quantity of tomatoes cost.
And they just pick in the menu and they don't really
calculate.
Or do they really calculate?
And my second question was, is it
the case that maybe the kids who end up working in markets
end up being the kids who are very, very good at math?
And so it's a selection.
So the first question is it real?
Do they really know how to count?
And second question is, is it just because it's
very selected subset?
So in order to answer this question,
we completed two studies--
one in Kolkata, one in Delhi--
where we went to market.
We is not me, but Indian people from our team.
They went and bought vegetables.
So they went three times.
Three pairs of shoppers went and bought each time two items--
so say, tomatoes and eggplant-- in funny quantities
so that it really requires a calculation.
So 300 gram of tomato, 450 gram of eggplant.
And then they gave the kid 500 rupees
and asked for the change.
OK, so this is not a usual--
you have to do your multiplication,
and then you have to add up, and then
you have to do the subtraction, you have to give the change.
You have to do that fast.
So we did that in Delhi, in Kolkata, three transaction
and in Delhi.
And after we had done that a little bit later on someone
came to the child and asked them if they were willing to do
little math games with us.
So that's the source of the data.
And then in Delhi we also went to schools
and did the opposite.
We played math games with them and then
we set up a fake market and asked them to sell
stuff, similar operation.
So what did we find?
The first one is that kids are, in fact, very good at math.
They get things right about 95% of the time.

The calculation is correct 95% of the time.
Sometimes there is a mistake, but you can tell them.
So with correction, 95%.
Without, 92%.
In Delhi, they are much less good.
The kids, the school kids, are much less good
than the market kids.
The school kids get it right about 50% of the time.
So the market children are, in fact, good at math,
and they are better than the school children.
The second thing is that it's not
just that they can do their own things, it's they can do other.
When we were playing the games, we
were giving them some other exercises.
Suppose that your tomatoes are not 25 rupees a KG,
but 28, then how much would it cost, and so on.
They make more mistakes than if it's their own thing.
And the further away it is-- for example,
if you go from tomato to carrots, it's a bit harder.
And from things sold in kilos to things sold by unit,
it's a bit harder.
So every time you go a bit further
from their sphere of expertise, they make more mistakes.
But by and large, they still get it right.
Even when it's far away, it's not their goods,
it's not their type of unit, and it's not the price,
they still get it right 60% of the time.
But now, if you ask them the other question, the thing
about division, the type of division I showed you before
or the type of subtraction I do, suddenly they're gone.
32% of the Calcutta kids can do a division.
50% of them can do a subtraction.
About half can-- I'm sorry, 15% of the Delhi kids
can do a subtraction.

15% of them can do a division.
And about half can do a subtraction,
which is crazy because 95% can do
two multiplication, an addition and subtraction correct.
But with the other test, only half can do a subtraction.
So what is going on here?
What's going on is they see the test.
They see that, you're asking me math question.
I'm not good at math.
That's why I'm not in school actually.
And in fact, they are good at math,
but they are not-- the moment you show them school math,
they're trying to bring up the algorithm.
They're trying to write things down.
They do the algorithm the wrong way.
They get the place value wrong.
Whereas in their own work, they actually
have developed methods that work well.
And they aren't mixed up by the half-baked
method they've learned from the schools
and not fully understood.
So that suggests that the school is
unable to take advantage of the flexibility of these children.
Note that when they can round, they are able to get problems.
They make less mistakes if things are say, 49% or 51%
because it can be rounded.
So that's the thing for the market kids.
For the school kids, not only they get it wrong half
the time, but they also get it-- even when they get it right,
this is how they arrive at the answer.
They do the algorithm extraordinarily inefficient.
They spend half an hour to answer the problem, which they
wouldn't have in the market.
So the conclusion is that the school
are unable to leverage or recognize existing knowledge,
either abstract or concrete.
So they are quite bad at selecting kids as well,
not just producing knowledge.
And in addition, what little they teach
is not useful for life.
Because even kids who are able to do
division and subtraction aren't able to put
it to use in everyday life.
So that is the problem we have with schools
in developing countries.

A lot of people are trying to figure out what this is about.
I want to tell you what it's not about.
It is not about the fact that children are unable to learn.
Why we know that?
Well, because they learn the market
the mathematical games just as well as the Cambridge kids.
It is not because teachers are underpaid because they
are, in fact, relative to other, overpaid.
And it is not either because they are lazy
or they don't understand their job.
The main problem that seems to be happening in developing
countries is what we've called the Tyranny of the Curriculum,
which is the way teachers understand
their job is to be teaching the curriculum, no matter what.
The curricula in a lot of developing countries
are coming straight from the colonial power that
have imposed very strict and demanding curricula
for a small elite of students who
were going to be their clerks in the future.
When education system were expanded,
the curricula haven't changed.
So you have situation like that, slip grade 4 curriculum
in Haryana in India, where I hope
you are good about your table up to 15
because that's the November program of grade 4 in Haryana.
So the level of what the kids are supposed to in grade 4--
and remember, these are kids who cannot add or subtract--
is completely crazy.
It corresponds to some dream of someone
that the education system should do
to an illusion of elite that, to some extent,
is emphasized as well by the parents.
Because the parents think of schools
as producing kids who might go to get a government job
and don't necessarily have in mind the benefits
that you get from just learning to read and write
in your everyday life, like we saw with the kids.
And that's the core of the problem
of the education quality in developing countries.
And hence, the solution has to be
about trying to break that in the everyday practice.
So what we'll do in the case on Monday
is to think about-- to start from this definition of what
the problem is or this statement of the problem,
and to think about what are possible solutions
to bring to improve the quality of education in this context.
PROFESSOR: And it's not, of course, just an Indian problem.
We have the same problem in Kenya.
And I mentioned from France before, I think France also
has a little bit of that.
Trying to get rid of it slowly, but quite elitist curriculum.
In comparison to
Finland, for example, where kids do not
learn to read until age 7, and where
there is a huge emphasis on success
in primary grade on reading.
And Finland is the country in Europe.
In fact, in the OECD that has the best test scores
at the primary level.
So it's not a proof of that, but this is a sign
that this is not just this kind of elitism wing of test scores
is a kind of a worldwide phenomenon that
correlates with success.
So let me stop here for a minute if people have questions.

ASSISTANT: OK, so this is not really a question,
but there's quite a few people commenting in terms of examples
from their countries--
Ethiopia, Nigeria, for example--
where teachers are not highly paid,
and they're just wondering, is it
the comparison to other sectors that shows that--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so what you have to think what highly paid
means is in a country, of course,
you cannot pay the teachers in Ethiopia the same as they are
paid in the US.
The question is, where teachers stand
relative to the rest of the salary level in the population.
And I don't know the situation of every single countries,
but I know many countries, and in general, in particular,
public school teachers tend to be at a much higher percentile
level of the country distribution in poor countries
than they are in rich countries.
And that's true for civil servants in general
who get a premium to be a civil servant as [INAUDIBLE] and Fred
Finan have shown that is much larger in developed countries.
And the result of that, actually,
is that those are jobs who are highly desired.
I have a project in Ghana, where we give a secondary school
scholarship to kids, and the most desirable outcome for them
is to get a job as a teacher.
And in fact, they wait for a very long time
until they can get a spot in the teacher college
in order to get those jobs.
And then once they get those jobs,
they suddenly get much, much more comfortable financially
than they came from.
So I think that's actually a reasonably general phenomenon,
but there might be exceptions that I don't know about.
ASSISTANT: And there's another question
from Priscilla Hamukwala.
In your experiments, has there been any systematic gender
differences in math skills?
If so, are there any particular factors
that contribute to that?
PROFESSOR: At the kids' level for small kids, no.
You find girls and boys doing just as well.
For the kids in markets, they are almost all boys,
so there was no girls to look at.

ASSISTANT: And then we have a couple
of questions about class size and how
that affects learning outcomes.

PROFESSOR: Surprisingly, unless it
leads to changes in pedagogy, it doesn't
tend to have a large effect in developing countries,
contrary to what we find in richer countries.
So for example, in Kenya, we had an experiment
where we divided class size in two,
and there was no impact if nothing else was changed,
if it was a regular teacher and there was no grouping of kids
by ability or achievement.
ASSISTANT: And one last question,
on the learning level, did you look at the role of language?
Does it make a difference if students
learn using their mother tongue as a medium of instruction?
PROFESSOR: So I haven't done studies like that,
but there are numbers of studies that look
at the medium of instruction.
I think the results tend to find that for early grades,
this is easier for children and they learn more
if the instruction is there in their own language,
and that's going to relate to some of the things
I'm going to talk just now.
I mean, that's, in some sense, relates to what I'm already
doing, which is that, for example, in Kenya, kids
are nominally taught in English, which for many children,
is their third language after their own local language
and then Swahili.
So in one of the very early randomized experiments
by Michael Kremer, he gave textbooks,
which were in English, and these textbooks had no impact
whatsoever, and one of the reasons
is that they were in English that most kids can't even read.
PROFESSOR: So that's the problem,
is if that indeed is the problem, that teaching is not
at the right level, that the curriculum leaves many children
behind, that teachers feel that it is their job
to teach the curriculum.
So in many countries, it actually is their job.
It is part of their job description
to complete the curriculum, while it might not
be part of their description to make sure
that any children actually reach there.
That means that if children start
losing track early on, say, because they reach
grade three, for example, without knowing to read yet,
nobody's going to teach them to read now because now,
by grade three, things are already established.
And you are supposed to be learning to do
other things with your reading.
And kids can be hopelessly lost forever and will not
learn to read and will not learn other things.
And that's kind of what we are finding here.
If that's the problem, then it means that one can really
make significant gains in schools
by abandoning a uniform curriculum that's
based on age, with automatic promotion,
as we discussed earlier, in favor of a system
that where you have teaching at the right level,
so [INAUDIBLE],, where kids are regularly assessed
using very simple tools.
Then they are grouped by homogeneous
learning level in groups.
And then they start by getting foundational skills
appropriate to the level where they are now.
And then kids are constantly reassessed and moved
to the level as they progress.
This is a program that was the brainchild of Pratham, which
was created by Dr. Madhav Chavan,
quickly joined by Dr. Rukmini Banerji,
initially with UNICEF funding in Bombay
and then moving to now serving millions of children
all over other countries and [INAUDIBLE] in the rest
of the world as well.
Pratham has long been a partner of [INAUDIBLE] and my group.
So we've had a chance to evaluate
using randomized evaluation, several iterations
of the Pratham model.
And here is a timeline of the project.
So first of all, we were able to directly evaluate the program
in urban areas, in '21, '23.
So it's kind of teaching the ancestor of the teaching
at the right level program.
Then in rural areas, in Uttar Pradesh,
and then in the summer camp in Bihar,
and then in school teacher-led learning improvement, and then
a program in Ghana that was replicating
some of the models of tested here,
tested in 2005, 2006, and then another teacher-led model
in 2012, 2013, and then finally, another learning camp,
which is more of a taking over of the schools for a period
of time in 2013, 2014.
So I show you this long timeline to explain
how it takes a long time to go from long time and a lot
of iteration, to go from a proof of concept, which probably we
had in '21, '23 with the evaluation of the [INAUDIBLE]
program, to a program that can be scaled up, both in India
and the rest of the world.
So what we find when we have Pratham staff or volunteer
in school is huge gains.
And this is the last program over here.
And-- sorry, let me just go back to the timeline
and explain to you.
So we first found big gains of the program,
both in rural and urban areas.
And then Pratham got involved in the scale up of this program
through government partnership.
And we were interested in testing the scale up version.
One possibility of the scale up are summer camps,
where the government teacher teach,
but outside of their normal curriculum approach.
One possible approach is to teach the teachers
to implement these strategies inside the schools itself.
They adopt, in principle, benefits and drawbacks
of both methods.
The benefits of the in-school model
is that these kids are already there.
So you might as well teach them when they are there.
Whereas in summer schools, you have to kind of hunt for them.
They are not very0-- they are not necessarily all coming.
In fact, many of them do not come.
The disadvantage, however, is that in the school,
in the model where teachers try to teach inside the school,
it competes with their other activities.
And in fact, what we found in our first 2008,
2010 experiment is that the summer school model
worked very well, showing that the teachers are perfectly
able to teach when it's the only thing they have to do,
even though they have to chase the children.
But an in-school model didn't work at all,
partly because the teacher just didn't implement it.
And why didn't they implement it?
Well, we conducted a detailed focus group with them
and they told us, look, I really like your activities,
but I have to complete my curriculum.
I have no choice.
So that led to a rethinking about how
to make the program work.
And basically, the idea is that you either have--
if it's going to be run by teachers,
two things have to happen.
First of all, they have to really understand
that this is their job, that this is not something
they have to do on the side, that the government really
wants them to successfully implement the program.
And second of all, they have to be
given some space in the school day or the school
years to do it.
So this is what we tried in Haryana,
but with two changes on the program.
One is to have the cadre of inspectors to start by training
themselves and trying themselves so that they could be,
effectively-- these are the supervisors of the teachers--
convey that this is what the teacher should be doing,
and that they can do it, and how to do it.
And secondly, to create a space in the day-- so
it was a special hour that was entirely
devoted to these activities, and nothing else
could be done there.
The other possibility is to just--
and in settings where schools are very dysfunctional, works
very well, is to just have Pratham go into the schools
and run learning camps.
And both of these models are extraordinarily effective.
Given that, it took some time to arrive at programs
that can be scaled up.
And now they are being scaled up, teaching at the right level
today reach millions of children--
or, reached millions of children before the pandemic in India
and in India and is now spreading
in several countries in Africa under Pratham leadership, which
is a great example of an innovation spreading
from South to South.
PROFESSOR: The success of Pratham
and the success of the teaching at the right level
is both instrumental.
And it also tells us that--

meaning that it leads to a good policies that
can be scaled up in other places and hopefully
will improve learning level.
But it only improves learning level to some extent.
And in particular, one of the things
that we struggled with in the scale up of the program
both in India with the teachers, for example, and sometimes
with policymakers is, a certain resistance
to sort of waste time in away from the curriculum
to go back to the basics in grade 3 and 4.
So the idea that you would go back to teaching, reading,
and very simple math to kids in three and four, people still
implicitly or explicitly consider
that it's a bit of a waste of time,
and that there should be-- they don't have time
and should highly be working on the curriculum.
So these are really constant persuasion efforts.
And you arrive to-- you succeed to an extent, and that's good.
But you might ask yourself, can more be
done to fix primary education?
So one radical solution is to just give up on the schools.

Pratham's mission originally was "every child in school."
Then they added, "every child in school and learning."
Then they added, "every child in school and learning well."
And sometimes now, when you talk to Madhav Chavan,
he's wondering whether they need every child in school even,
and whether the learning should be outside of schools?
And in fact, there are many efforts now--
and this was accelerated with the pandemic--
of getting learning to the kids outside of the schools
without trying to be mediated by the school.
And one thing that has really helped there
is the advent of digital technologies--
cheap tablets that have, video content that
be given to the schools.
You're going to spend some time with [? Kartik ?] discussing
the great potential of these digital technologies
in particular in adapting the level in sort of mechanically,
automatically adapting the exercises
to the level of the kids.
So getting sort of embedded teaching at the right level.
So this is very satisfying because, for example,
with the studies of this program,
Mindspark, a software program used in tutoring lessons,
led to really, really large impact
in a way that is, in principle, quite sustainable because this
is done outside of the school using computers,
so that can be supervised with by pretty much anybody.
The computers and tablets are now extraordinarily cheap.
The software is a huge fixed cost.
The marginal cost is essentially zero so
that you can really make great progress.
The issue is that schools continue
to have the monopoly to test and to legitimate knowledge.
And therefore, the fundamental approach
was giving up on the schools is that kids go to school.
Parents have agreed to do that.
97% of kids are enrolled.
Parents recognize the legitimacy of the school system.
Anything else requires them--
require us to convince them to show up.
So the first India program was not the [INAUDIBLE] program
that was tested in Gujarat, but the second one in rural areas
was tested out of school.
So kids had to come to two special camps out of school
for a couple of hours a day.
And they were absolutely spectacular effects
on very few kids.
So the average effect for the community were very positive,
but it was driven by the fact that the kids who went
really benefited from it.
So you think that kind of a bit of a waste.
Where you have 100% of the kids in school,
you would like to find something that works for them.
Another issue that you're going to find
in the study of the Mindspark, which you'll see a bit later,
is that at the end of the day, the test scores, although they
were enormous, didn't bring the kids to grade level
and therefore didn't really impress parents
that it could help with passing exams.
And there was very low willingness
to pay for the program by parents
once it was not free anymore.
And that's an issue.
I'm going to not spend too much time on that
because you're going to see it with Karthik.
But there was really this huge contrast between huge gains
here, where you really have--
here are the gains, tremendous gains.
0.67 standard deviation.
In math, 0.44.
In Hindi, it's very spectacular.
But no gain on school exams.
And therefore, no parent interest, and the program
had to stop.

And the problem is--
it's very related to what happened in the private schools
and why the private schools don't
have an ambiguous positive impact, even though they
are cheaper for what they deliver,
which is already good in and of itself--
is that parents continue to buy into the obsession of elitism.
The schools, for many parents, is
valuable for the possibilities it opens up.
And that's why in the private schools,
you see impact on English and Hindi,
and not on Telugu, the local language.
In [? Ghana-- ?] so it should be "ganna."
In [? Ghana, ?] we collected before a scholarship--
before giving scholarships to kids
to attend secondary school, we administered a baseline survey
where we asked kids and their parents
what they thought their returns to education were.
And parents had tremendous hope for secondary school education.
They thought that the income gain
would be of the order of 200%, 300%,
mainly because kids would be able to become
teachers and earn a lot of money once they do that.
In fact, very few kids became teachers,
so they increased their--
there was not such a large increase
in the income of the kids.
Many other good things happened, but this good things
doesn't seem to be particularly what the parents value.
So if what the parents value is mainly the legitimization
process that comes with the school,
then it seems really, really important to continue
working with the school, even though it's hard.
So we have to find a way to engage with the school system.

So if you have to engage with the school system,
then given that the problem is this curriculum is too hard,
you could say, well, it's very simple.
We just have to change the curriculum.
And that remains, I think, the Holy Grail.
For me, it's something that really one should work on.
Unfortunately, it's not going to be easy.
There is tremendous opposition from the education world.
In many settings, we go, in some sense, the other way,
where the curriculum is not simplify with one exception,
which is the government of Delhi, which decide to--
explicitly decide that they won't
finish the curriculum in Delhi.
They started to track kids to make sure
that they understood something.
And it led to large gains in test scores
before the pandemic.
In fact, so much so that the municipal schools in Delhi
outperformed for the first time ever the private school
at the school finishing exam.
So it seems to be that there they
had kind of the-- that's the one kind of political decision,
but it's a very special government, which
is sort of in term of its ideology, which
is both a sort of populist in a good sense in terms
of making sure that the services serve the people.
And that has remained a relatively isolated example.
PROFESSOR: We still want to continue working on it.
But that's hard.
And that's not really something economists have much
to say about.
Unfortunately, they are not the people
who are kind of listened to on this subject.
So you can't give up on the schools
because that's where the kids are.
You can't reform them wholesale because they are not
willing to do that.
So what?
You could work on the margins.
Some part of the systems are much more open
than the schools themselves.
One margin is tutoring.
So many kids are involved in tutoring
on top of being in school.
This is widespread around the world, where kids go to school
and then they attend tutoring.
And whatever learning is happening
is happening during their tutoring session.
And there, of course, it's like a free for all.
So the tutoring sessions is where, for example, you
could have computers that teach kids better.
And this is what was tried with the Mindspark program.
Another margin is completely different schools.
So in India, in Uttar Pradesh, schools don't teach anything.
But on the other hand, the good thing
is they are happy to be replaced by anybody.
So that creates a margin.
Another place is preschool, where
there is not much of a view yet of what needs to be done.
And so this is an area where there is a lot of possibilities
to propose something that's on good quality,
so that kids are actually-- even the poorest kids arrive
in school just as ready for what the school system is
going to throw at them.
And therefore, they don't get lost at the beginning
and don't get lost very early on.
Even the early grades, grade one and two,
might still be fine because the curriculum there is still
acts on the very basic things, reading, writing,
basic numeracy.
And therefore, all the activities
that can be proposed to help kids to learn to read and write
are actually very well received by teachers.
Because they see this as achieving--
helping them to achieve what they want to achieve anyway,
which is to teach the curriculum.
So there is a whole spectrum of early years between grade three
and--
between the age of three and the age of seven or eight,
which is a very open margin where
the advances from cognitive science, the experiments coming
from the field can be kind of aggregated into something
that would work well.
The summers are another margin.
They are very long.
Kids learn-- lose a lot.
So here is an example of doing that.
You remember the first experiment
I showed you about preschool mathematician that
was successful in teaching kids to intuitive mathematics,
but not successful to--
was not leveraged by the schools.
So what we decided to do in a second experiment
is to still continue to work in preschools
but add a formal component to it, so symbolic games.
And so now we compare conditions where
we are teaching only nonsymbolic math to a condition where
we are teaching symbolic math and then a condition
where so nonsymbolic only, symbolic only, mixed,
and no treatment.
And what we find here is that when you have mixed,
you're learning just as much by inline one, by inline two,
and by inline three, in term of nonsymbolic skills.
And then in term of symbolic skills, you are learning more.
And in fact, it continues even.
1 and 1/2 year later, the gain in symbolic skills
is still there in the mixed scheme.
So it seems that by combining the same duration of time,
nonsymbolic and symbolic games, you don't lose anything
on the nonsymbolic learning.
And you gain something on the symbolic learning.
So kids are actually learning better once they are in school.

So armed with this model, what did we do?
Well, we tried to put in place a scalable model that
could be played with kids with a lot of autonomy
after an initial introduction by the teachers
in those early years in government schools,
which for kindergarten and grade one teachers.
The cards emphasized the base 10 structure of the number system
and the equivalence between 1-10 and 10-1,
allowing-- teaching people to-- teaching kids
to learn that which are fundamental skills in grade
one.
The kids were able to play alone.
They played competitively across groups.
They understand the games very well.
And what we find here is that that led to a strong impact
on symbolic math outcomes, both for kindergarten
and for grade one students.
So this was a very good result. And it
suggests that it's something that we are now
working on scaling it up, both directly through the schools
and then through nongovernment actors in many states
to make the kids ready for whatever is ready for them
by working in that kindergarten, grade one margin.
The only worry was that.
So I think this is hugely promising.
And that's kind of the area where
I spend most of my time on now.
The only worry is that the temptation to close this margin
as it expands.
So whenever you have the reason why the margin is open
is, to some extent, because nobody has paid attention yet.
But once everyone starts realizing that, oh, preschool
is important, the worry is that you start setting up
a curriculum for preschools.
And you regulate it away.
And then you might suddenly find yourself
with the same problems.

So what's the ultimate strategy?
I would say it's patience.
It's realizing that there is not going to be
a silver bullet, ultimately.
But we will need to continue to engage with the school system
as it is, however frustrating.
The good thing is we exactly know what needs to be done.
When it's possible to teach and prepare the kids, number one.
Teach them at the right level once they arrive, number two.
So the challenge now is more of a political economy.
Organizational problem is to exploit all the existing wedges
and pry open new ones at every opportunity.
I think the pandemic actually could be an opportunity
or could be a complete disaster.
It could be an opportunity if the school system realizes
that the kids are coming back with even more differences
in their levels.
It could be a disaster if they don't and they
continue to try to shove the curriculum to them.
But any of this effort leads to real gains,
even if they don't lead to a revolution.
And these gains are multiplied by millions and millions
of children.
PROFESSOR: So I'm going to stop here and take questions now
for the rest of the talk.
[INAUDIBLE]
TA: We have a question from [? Biraj ?] [? Bisht. ?] Could
you talk a little bit more about examples where the tyranny
of curriculum does not exist or is not as severe?
For instance, you mentioned Finland.
How did they structure their curriculum?
Basically, are there any best practices around this problem?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So Finland is a great example of no tyranny of the curriculum.

So kids stay in kindergarten until they are 7.
They start learning to read only at age 7.
And therefore, most of them are ready.
That's number one.
Number two, when kids--
there is a software they're using in all of the schools
to teach early reading that was originally developed
for kids with dyslexia and now is
used for older kids, which is an extraordinarily progressive.
Starts from really the basics of phonics, and that kids
do every day for a while, and then that
help the kids progress at their own level
because it's moved them to the next step
once they are already ready for it.
So constant reinforcement.
Number three, Finland has a lot of human resources
in the school--
many people who are available to provide
individual level of attention to kids in small groups by level,
and so on.

TA: Can you talk-- this is a question from [? Akina ?]
[? Shibuya. ?] Can you talk a bit more about changing
the minds of education bureaucrats?
Presumably you are going around them
by supporting non-governmental projects
because it's too hard to change the curriculum itself.
Is that right?
PROFESSOR: No, I spent most of my time trying
to work with school systems for reasons that I explained.
That being outside of schools, there are not enough kids
there.
So I spent most of my time trying to work through schools.
I'm not doing that alone.
I'm doing that with local actors, in particular Pratham.
But Pratham is mostly acting in very close tandem
with the school systems, both in India and elsewhere.
And the convincing is interesting it's complicated
because there's this idea that you basically there
is the idea that if you make the curriculum simpler, you are--
I don't know-- disrespecting the children
or selling them something less good
than what they are entitled to and that the way in which you
show that you are on the side of the children
is by having this very ambitious curriculum and lofty plans.
So there is no ill will I don't think,
but just a lack of understanding of how it reflects
to the reality on the ground.
Then where we get the most success usually
is when there is a local champion,
for example a district education officer or a state.
Sometimes at the level of the state,
but if it's at the level of the state,
it needs to go back down to the district.
That can, then, in turn, convince people,
convince the bureaucracy, the school inspectors, et cetera.
We've had-- this is, I think, the really fundamental shift
that happened that shifted from in-school model of remedial
learning to be unsuccessful to successful
is when we realized that we had to train the inspectors,
and that the way-- now, every program that Pratham does,
they first get Pratham bureaucrats to train them.
And they send them to schools, and they
send them to try, et cetera.
And then you have a force of people
that's much more likely to actually implement the program.

TA: We have a question from Mariel Bedoya.
So you talked mainly--
you talked about the main problem of curriculum.
If you had to weigh the contribution of all
of the problems, you sort of touched
on-- curriculum, teachers, infrastructure,
health of students, incentives, et cetera.
To explain the learning gaps between developing
and developed countries, what weight would you put to each?
PROFESSOR: I think I made it pretty clear that I
don't think anything explains things as much
as the curriculum.
It's the combination of the curriculum
and the way that the incentives that it gives you down the line
to everyone in the system.
TA: A question from [? Garima ?] [? Agarwal. ?] Could a possible
strategy for getting parents to support programs like Mindspark
be spending some time helping kids do better on the formal
school curriculum in addition to the treatment, i.e.
Teaching at the right level?
Anecdotally, this seems to be an informal solution
many motivated teachers at public institutions use.
PROFESSOR: So that's a great idea,
but the problem is that you can't teach people
nuclear physics until they know how to count.
And the Mindspark system doesn't stop the kids at the lower
level, but it only makes them progress
when they have the understanding that they need in order
to move forward.
And you couldn't reproduce the same error
of the school curriculum.
If you said, well, fine, they don't yet
know how to do subtraction, but since they are in grade eight,
it's absolutely essential that they
can solve this very difficult division problem.
So I'm going to also try to teach them that algorithm.
And the problem you have when you
do that is that you have this half-baked, half-understood
algorithm that confuses kids.
And this is exactly what we're seeing in the Market
Math, where you're trying to do that,
and the kids are unable to-- once you present things
in the school format, the kids are
unable to do things that they actually know how to do.
So that's the danger of trying to skip ahead
or something like that on top of teaching
the foundational skills.
So the Mindspark system is set up
to take the kids all the way where they need to be,
but you need to start from where they are.
And there is no time in the sessions--
in the limited time in the session-- that it's
left outside of the school day.

TA: Another question from Jose Pinilla.
Are there any potential drawbacks to displacing
the official curriculum?
Do we have any evidence on long-term impacts
of in-school implementation of teaching at the right level?

PROFESSOR: That's a great question.
So I doubt.
Because unless-- what we are seeing the result
of the curriculum--
I doubt that there are big drawbacks,
because we are seeing the result of the curriculum now.
I didn't show you some evidence that for the learning
of older kids--

from time to time, the [INAUDIBLE] report is on older
kids--
and then it teaches them some very simple kind
of life questions.
Like, if you have a packet of cleaning solution that's
for 20 liters, and then you need to do 40 liters,
how many packets should you use?
And kids are terrible at these questions.
It's even worse than at the formal math questions.
And even the kids who can do the formal math
can't do these problems.
That echoes exactly what we found in the Market Math
problems, where the kids in school who could do division
couldn't do the Market Math problems.
They did them badly.
And even if they managed to do them,
it took like them 20 minutes to give people
the change, which is, of course, not practical.
So I don't think that what is being taught now is
particularly useful for people's--
either at giving people the foundational math that
would allow them to go further, or the foundational reading
abilities that would allow them to go further,
or in teaching them skills that would be useful in their lives.
So I don't see the drawback of replacing that
by actually doing something that did either of these two things.
That said, to my knowledge, there
haven't been long term impact of [? tile ?] programs.

TA: I Have another question from Pradeep Chaudhry.
When you are connecting curriculum
with learning outcomes, is it about the curriculum
and its design or the pressure on teachers
in completing the curriculum.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So that's both, but they go hand in hand.
If you had curriculum but they were just suggestions,
it might be fine.
But all of the pressure and the incentive system
is on completing.
For example, in India, under the right to Education Act,
teachers are compelled by law to complete the curriculum.
And in other systems--
for example, in Kenya, in Ghana, in Tanzania, in Uganda--
where there are school leaving exams.
Teachers and schools are ranked by how many kids managed
to do well at the school leaving exam, which again, is related
to completing the curriculum and paying attention
to the top of the class, who has the ability
to actually complete it.

TA: We have a question from [? Ebenezer ?] [? Kondo ?]
specifically about your research in Ghana.
Have you done any validation studies
to further support your initial findings?
Currently, in Ghana, a new curriculum
has been introduced at the basic school level,
but no accompanying textbooks for teachers
to effectively deliver.
What impacts do you envisage this
could have on the quality of education in Ghana?
PROFESSOR: I'm not exactly sure what you refer to
by validation study.
The study we did was among secondary school kids-- so much
older children.
And it was randomized.
Kids were randomized in 2008 and given scholarships
to attend secondary school.
And then we have been following them ever since,
but we haven't done a second study
doing the same thing again.
So we just have this one cohort.
I don't-- I've made a successful career not to make predictions
on what could happen when something does something,
so I'm not going to predict what could be the impact
of the program of not having the textbooks that go with the new
curriculum.
But one would think that it could
be helpful to have some complement.
TA: A question from [? Hijab ?] [? Tahir. ?] Given the lag
between research and policy implementation are there
strategies for schools to measure the existing knowledge
post pandemic and then alter curriculum plans accordingly?
PROFESSOR: That's a great question.
I really wish.
And we've been trying to advocate in this direction.
It doesn't seem very high on anybody's mind right now.
As one of the things that is really striking,
this pandemic in developing countries
is how the schools were not very high on anybody's mind.
And to rethink now how we are going
to accompany kids who are coming with these very
different experiences would be pretty critical.
And I don't think it's happening on a very systematic basis
right now.

Education is highly positively correlated with other good things like income and health. Why is this not proof that increasing education causes increased income and health?



Education and these other outcomes are difficult to precisely measure, and the number of countries in the world with reliable data for these measurements is fairly limited, so we have too small of a sample to come to any firm conclusions.

There may be another omitted variable that is responsible for increasing both education and income or health.

The causation may be reversed: increasing income or health may cause increased education.


True or false? At least in Ghana, parents underestimate potential benefits of education because they fail to take into account the value of qualifying for a government job, which explains why so few attend secondary and tertiary school and also explains the high rates of absenteeism discussed at the beginning of this lecture.



True

False


Which of the following describes the basic principle behind Teaching at the Right Level?



Teachers should be provided with adequate teaching materials (books, chalk, etc.) and other resources to be able to teach effectively.

The number of students per teacher should be reduced in order to increase the amount of one-on-one instruction received by each student.

Students should be taught material according to their level of knowledge, not according to their age.

The most talented students should be identified early so that they can receive special attention so that they can reach their full potential.





