PROFESSOR: All right, so let me get started.
This is lecture number nine about savings,
and what are we going to talk about today?
We're going to talk about why do people save
or why should they save or why do they not save.
we're going to then have a look at what
are the existing ways in which many of the poorer people
save overall.
And then I'm going to tell you about three broad ways in which
we're trying to look at ways in which people
have tried to increase savings among the poor in various ways.
One of them is providing people just simple access to saving.
That's what I have here in number four.
Second is about commitment savings, providing people
with lock boxes or ways, essentially,
where they can lock away their savings
they don't have access to.
And that helps them perhaps save more.
And the last one is we're going to look
at what's called savings monitors, which
is the idea that you can enlist somebody else who might sort
of monitor you and what you're doing,
and that might help you save more or follow through
with your savings plans.
OK, but let me first start very simply with a simple question.
Why do people save, and why is it
a good idea to save for at least some of them?
Yeah, Evan.
STUDENT: People save [INAUDIBLE] purchases,
things that they otherwise couldn't
buy [INAUDIBLE] protection against, like, the [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Let me start with the first thing you said.
People save because they have potentially lumpy or big
expenses they might not be able to afford
with their sort of daily, weekly, or monthly income.
Would you have an example for that?
STUDENT: Like a house.
PROFESSOR: A house.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] a big [INAUDIBLE] school
or something.
PROFESSOR: House, car, paying for kids' schools.
Any other examples?
This is all great.

Yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, like in the reading,
they talk about saving just to build a whole home,
like, room by room.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, yeah.
So, exactly.
But you can--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Hm?
Yeah.
So--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
That's what people do brick by brick,
essentially, room by room.
We're going to get to that about kind
of what are people doing in practice,
how are they going to achieve it.
Now, but let's first talk about what
are the motivations, the underlying reasons
why that is, and then get back to what you just said.
So, I was asking about what are other sort
of lumpy expenditures, big expenditures,
that people might save for.
I think Evan was already saying house, school fees, and so on.
Any other examples?
Yeah, Jack.
STUDENT: Emergencies.
Like, medical or other.
PROFESSOR: Emergencies, yes.
Exactly.
So-- and why is that helpful or useful to save for emergencies?
STUDENT: Because you may not know when those occur.
So, having money on the side can help you pay for that.
So you don't have to sell other assets.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so one--
so, think about, for example, health emergencies
that might occur.
What are the reasons why now health savings might be useful?
One reason is, you know, while you have some expenses that
come up, you might just not simply be able to pay for them.
So, like, say somebody needs an operation.
They need to go to the hospital, and that
costs money in some cases.
Now you might just not be able to pay for it overall
and then just not get the adequate health treatment
that you're looking for.
Suppose you could actually pay for it.
You know, suppose you just take, then,
all of your income on a certain day or a certain week or month
and paid for those health expenditures.
What is the issue with that?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess then if there's any other daily needs
that you have for food and things like that,
then you don't have money for that.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
And what is sort of the term that economists use for that,
or what's the--
so, consumption would go down a lot in that week or month
and so on because you just have to use all of your money
to pay for those expenditures or for health
expenditure, other shocks that you might have.
So your consumption would go down a lot,
and people don't like that.
And what do economists call this?
Anybody?
Yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] like, income effect.
PROFESSOR: It's an income--
it's not quite an income effect.
It's like your income--
your available income then goes down
a lot or, like, whatever you consume in
that period goes down a lot.
And so you have huge variation in income.
And so people like to avoid that overall.
People refer to that as consumption smoothing.
This is the idea that you want to avoid large variation
in consumption over time.
And sort of savings can help deal with shocks
as was just said.
So, that's the idea that if I have an extra dollar that I
could consume right now or I could save it,
the idea is then if in a time where
I have a really bad shock, my available consumption
will go down a lot.
And then that state of the world and that time period
is going to be a lot more valuable for me
to have this extra dollar than it is right now when
I'm doing well overall.
OK, so there's, like, good times, and there's bad times.
And the idea is in bad times, when I don't have income
or when I have bad shocks and so on, then having an extra dollar
is more valuable.
I value that extra dollar more because it's
different from, like, not eating versus eating.
Versus right now, if I have an extra dollar or rupee,
for that matter, then it doesn't matter
so much whether I have an extra dollar because I have enough
to eat and so on for basic necessities anyway.
So that's consumption smoothing.
You want to avoid large variation
in consumption over time.
And so savings, having some savings in particular,
if I haven't purchased insurance products
or if I don't have access to insurance products,
just saving myself will be very helpful for that.
Economists also call that precautionary savings
in some settings.
Any other suggestions?
Yeah, Lucas.
STUDENT: If you have kind of a known capital
cost in the future for running your business--
so if you're a farmer, like, buying seeds
or buying fertilizer.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So you have known--
it's sort of similar to what Evan was saying earlier.
If you have-- in the future, you have some plans
where you want to buy something larger in some ways, that
could be related to your planting, your seeds,
or machines that you want to buy and so on.
They're large expenditures, but you
have a daily or weekly income that's relatively small.
You need to just save money over time
to make sure you can afford that large expense, right?
And that could be also--
could be also a house.
It could be also school fees and so on.
But it could also be productive investments, as you suggested.
Any other?
Yeah, Angela.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] taking up higher risks in investment.
If you have savings, you can afford to maybe do something
that-- not only for your [INAUDIBLE]
even engage in another business that's more [INAUDIBLE]
than you would do if you just were very tight [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's a nice idea.
So, that's kind of related to the consumption smoothing idea.
It's to say suppose I have zero savings,
and you ask me, do I want to--
or I have some savings, not very much, and you ask me,
would I like to invest in something very risky?
I might say, well, no because, you know,
in case that goes bad, you know, then
I will have nothing to eat, or I'll have,
like, the whole family will be hungry,
or we don't have enough money for other basic necessities.
So I cannot sort of afford to make this investment,
this risky investment, because I essentially have no buffer
or no nothing that will help me in case sort of the risky
investment goes bad.
And that's sort of, I think, related to the consumption
smoothing idea slightly differently.
Any other idea?

Once you start working once you're
done with college, if you start working then in jobs,
why should you save, perhaps?
Yeah.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] if you ever want to retire.
PROFESSOR: Retirement savings-- and why is that a useful idea?
Why should you save for retirement?
What are you trying to do here?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Right, and so--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] for [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So, exactly.
So, you work for income, make a lot of money hopefully.
And at some point, you will want to try to retire.
That--
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: You might get some pension,
or you might get some social security
or some other transfers from family and so on.
But you'll probably have less money available
just because your income that you usually have from your job
will not be available, right?
And so why might it be useful, then, to save?
What is the saving doing, then?
STUDENT: You have like a buffer for however
many years you think you can go without working [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Mm-hm.
Yeah.
Any other-- that's right.
Any other thoughts on why saving for retirement is a good idea?

Yeah.
STUDENT: You may be [INAUDIBLE] unable
able to work [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
And then what happens?
So you might not be able to work at some point.
And then what happens with your consumption?
STUDENT: Consumption [INAUDIBLE] If you have money,
it will stay the same.
But if you can't work, [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right, it would drop a lot.
In the extreme case, you have nothing.
Then, of course, then you would starve,
or that would be very bad.
But even if you have some access to some Social Security
or some access to some pension that you
might have available from your employer, and so on that
might not be enough.
So essentially, what happened is your consumption level
would drop.
And again, that's related to the idea of consumption smoothing.
People like to have sort of roughly equal consumption
at different points in time in their lives.
So the idea is that again, the marginal dollar,
the additional dollar that you have available now
if you're fairly rich, if you're working, is worth less to you
than it will be once you're retired in 30 or 40 years.
And perhaps in particular when you're not
able to work anymore, you will not have very much money.
And then you want to use those savings.
So essentially, it's to say there's a life cycle.
Economists would call it a life cycle of consumption and income
where you might have, like, income predictably
varying over time.
You know that once you're like 80 years old,
you're not going to earn that much money anymore.
And therefore, you want to avoid large drops in consumption
because once you have-- if you have
these large drops in consumption,
it would be very valuable to have at least some savings
to purchase food and other types of clothes,
et cetera, and so on.
And so then savings can help to make consumption
more even over the lifespan, in particular through retirement
savings.
But it could also be in other periods.
If you wanted to--
if you knew that once you're 50, you wanted to travel the world,
that might be also a useful thing
to do if you don't have that income at that time.
So it doesn't have to be retirement per se.
We talked, then, about lumpy expenditures.
We've already talked already--
buying a machine, school fees, et cetera.
These are large expenditures where essentially, you're
trying to match your income to-- or the available income
or money that you have to your expenditures that you
have in different time periods, right?
You might get, like, a certain amount of money every day.
You might make $5 every day.
But at some point, you have to pay $100 of school fees.
Now your daily income will not be enough to cover that.
So now you need to save for at least 20 days
or whatever amount of time.
So you have then $100 that you can
use to pay for your kids' school fees.
So that's good.
So there's good reasons to say.
Economists think that savings, at least some savings,
is a good idea.
Now, yet, in reality, often people
are not saving very much.
And so what might be some reasons why people are not
saving?

Yes.
STUDENT: Perhaps they can't anticipate
what those lumpy expenses may be in the future [INAUDIBLE]
they have no way of knowing.
PROFESSOR: And why might they not anticipate those?
Like, the school fees are pretty predictable, you would say.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] if you don't
have very much expendable extra income in the first place,
you might think, oh, I'll never be able to afford that.
So it's not even something I'm considering.
So you just kind of spend the money on [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right.
So this is sort of the idea that people are
too poor to save in some ways.
That's to say, like, I just have very little income right now.
I need to feed my family.
I need to make sure that we have enough other necessities
for the household and so on.
And I just cannot afford to save for the future.
What would you say to that argument?
That's a very commonly-made argument,
and I think there's surely some truth to that.
But what would you say to that argument overall?
We could just say, look.
People are too poor to save.
Can't save.
Lecture over.
Let's focus on other topics.
Yes.
STUDENT: No matter your income level,
the consumption smoothing effect would still happen.
So, while it's really, really not
ideal to have to cut off any more of your income
if it's, like, causing you to have
to eat less or anything like that,
it would still probably be in your favor to
in case your income [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So, savings decisions crucially are
decisions between today versus tomorrow for given income
or given wealth level overall.
That is to say it's a within person decision
or within family decision where, like, you're poor today.
You're likely, very likely, also be poor tomorrow.
And it could be even that tomorrow,
things will be a lot worse.
[INAUDIBLE] you might have some income today,
no income tomorrow.
So, like, if you have, you know, say, $5 today,
and that's your income that you have for the week,
you probably want to, you know, save some of that money
to have that money tomorrow.
So essentially, that's to say it's all
about-- it's not about absolute levels overall of income
or poverty and so on, how much money people have overall.
Of course, it would be better to have
and it's easier, of course to--
if you have a lot of money, it's very easy
to save because you don't need to cover that many expenses.
But even if you're relatively poor,
in time periods that are relatively good-- so you have
a day that's a good day or like a no bad shock or you
make some good income.
Those are days in which you want to save for the future
because there might be potentially--
this is what we covered here.
There might be, like, bad shocks coming in the future-- say,
health shocks or the like.
It might also be that you want to save
some money for some form of retirement or the like.
In some ways, at least because you know in the future,
you might not be able to earn income--
or you have for example school fees for your kid.
And then you need to save.
In some ways, if you're able to afford them somehow,
you need to be able to save, in some way, at least
a little bit every day.

PROFESSOR: As I already said, commitment devices
can be helpful for people, in some cases.
But demand for these commitment devices
tends to not be super high because often, they
lack flexibility.
Sometimes it's just too strict, this would be similar--
if you have your browser that restricts, essentially,
all internet activity and so on, but at some point,
you just want to meet your friend
or send them a short message.
I guess you have your phone.
You can do that anyway.
But essentially, once you have some emergency or other types
of issues that come up, these commitment devices
tend to be very rigid and not very flexible.
So then in addition then, because of that,
people don't tend to follow through with their plans,
and then have to pay penalties.
And then they're worse off than they
would have been if they had never even been
offered or chosen this commitment device.
So one solution, then, is soft-commitment device,
where the cost of not following through is not money--
so you don't lose any money or the like--
but rather, you get some social sanction or loss of reputation.
I think that's exactly what Julie was saying,
earlier, about the idea being, once you declare,
to some other people in your village,
someone to your friends, or other people that you know,
that you're going to do something, and they can learn,
then, subsequently, whether you did it or not,
people will judge you if you don't follow through.
If you keep saying certain things
and then don't follow through, people will judge you
or reprimand you in some other ways.
And so the idea here, in this setting is that--
so these are villages in India.
The idea is to encourage savings by assigning
a unique monitor to each saver.
So if I were the saver, I would say Jay would be my monitor
or it would be assigned to be my monitor.

Each participant is asked to make a bet with themselves
about their ability to save over six months.
So I would be asked, how much would you
like to save over the next six months?
I would be very overconfident, and say lots of money, say
$5,000.
Then the stakes, here, are just reputation gain or loss
from progress, in front of some other member in the village.
So Jay, who would be in my village,
would be told about my goal.
We'd say Frank has announced this goal.
And the monitor is informed about the target amount,
and then essentially, every two weeks,
simply informed about the progress.
OK?
She just learns, over time, what I've
been up to, how much I have saved, nothing else.
There's no actually activity.
In some sense, she doesn't have to do anything.
She's just informed.
Now of course, over time, she can then
learn whether I reached my $5,000 or not,
and then, perhaps, judge me.
She can also tell Mikey or Charles or other people
around her about my lack of progress or my progress.
And I might be worried about that.
And so why would people care about the monitor?
This is from participants, themselves.
Often, the concern is about this monitor might tell others.
Or people-- my friends, neighbors, important people
in the village, will learn.
And I will look like somebody who doesn't really
stick to his word or the like or is just kind of flaky.
And people don't want to be flaky in the village.
So once people have made these goals they want to stick to.
And then the monitors might be able to help them with that.
So now, what kind of person might be a good monitor?
If you could choose, in the network, what kind of person
would you pick?
We've talked about this, a little bit, already.
But suppose there's a network of people
and some people talk to some people and others talk
to others.
And they're connected in some ways.
What kind of person would be a good monitor for you,
if you think about, say, MIT?

Suppose you declared that you're going to do all the problem
sets until Friday and so on and so forth, and you can design,
as a monitor, what kind of monitor would be good for you?
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: If you have an academic advisor in the MIT example,
but in the village, it could be someone
who's respected within the village, so
a local religious leader.
PROFESSOR: Somebody who's important, yeah.
What else.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Somebody who talks loud?
Somebody--
PROFESSOR: Somebody who's chatty.
So suppose Mikey is very chatty and likes
to talk a lot to others and is a gossip,
then I want him to be my monitor,
but only if I follow through.
If I don't follow through, now everybody
will know that I haven't saved because he
will talk to lots of people.
So that's one.
And then do you want some people whom you know well or not well?
Or what do you want from those?
Yeah?
STUDENT: I think you want someone
who doesn't have a stake in you not saving money,
so not someone like a spouse or family member, who
might be asking you for money because then, they might not
encourage you to save.
PROFESSOR: Right.
But what about somebody who's really far away from you
from the network, like if they live
in a very different house from yours
and you don't ever talk to them?
Go or bad monitor?
STUDENT: Bad because there's really
not very much social pressure.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
And they also don't know your friends, right?
So you want approximate-- somebody who's close by, maybe
not too close, in some sense, but close by,
who will be chatty and will particularly
talk to people that you care about and that you run into a.
Lot OK?
And so my friend, [? Arun, ?] who's one of the authors
of this paper, loves to do this in comics.
So here's a network that he has written out.
Don't ask me who all these characters are.
But essentially, suppose you're the experimenter.
I guess this is Donald Duck, I think.
And suppose you are-- this is the participant in the study.
And now think about different monitors.
Suppose this person is a monitor.
That's a person with low centrality.
What does that mean?
That somebody who doesn't have a lot of connections to others.
And so if they talk to their friend
here, whatever this feature is, that's
not going to go very far in the network.
So you might talk to this guy.
And this one might talk to Bugs Bunny.
But it doesn't get very far because this guy is not
very connected.
If instead now, the monitors is Bugs Bunny,
himself, maybe he will talk to all sorts of people.
Lots more people are being affected.
Lots more people, in the village,
will judge you if you don't follow through.
Similarly, if you have a monitor that's
really far away in the network, where this fellow here,
in the upper right, you really don't really care.
Even if this person talks a lot, that's
really far away from you, from the network--
in the network.
You don't really care about these people.
You don't really run into them.
You might not even not know them that well and so on.
So it doesn't really matter how much this person talks.
On the other hand, if the person is here, maybe now,
he talks to these two fellows, these
are very proximate in your network.
You care a lot more about these two guys, knowing about things,
than people really being far away.
So is does this all to say?
This is to say that want people who are central in the network.
And you want people who are proximate in the network.
And this experiment was essentially
varying all that, was essentially
randomizing whether you had a monitor versus not.
And it was randomizing whether this monitor was either central
or not, or whether it was a proximate person, who
was nearby, in some sense, in the network, to you, or further
away.
What do they find?
They find, exactly as theory would suggest,
that being assigned a savings monitor, on average,
increases savings by quite a bit, by 36%.
Where is the money coming from?
Declines in expenditures and festivals,
transportation, also increased labor supply.
People work a little bit more if they have a monitor.
Information does flow through the network.
About 63% of monitors tell others
about the saver's progress.
So they're pretty chatty, overall.
And then the more central ones, or the chattier ones
and the proximate monitors, lead to larger increases in savings.
So if somebody who is pretty close to you is your monitor,
and who is chatting a lot, then you
increase your savings the most.
Interestingly, these effects actually
persist 15 months later.
That's a long time.
Lots of people-- usually, these things tend to go away easily.
There's a 34% increase in total savings, so overall savings,
not just the savings that you said
you would do as part of the experiment, and again,
an increased ability to respond to shocks.
So what is that to say?
That's to say that peer pressure,
like social-commitment devices, in some ways, can be helpful.
Very briefly, why is this a commitment device?
Well, it's a commitment device because essentially, you
make misbehaving more costly.
Right?
I'm declaring to everybody in the village,
or to some monitor, that I'm going to save a lot of money.
Now my price, in terms of social sanctions, of misbehaving,
is a lot higher.
Right?
If I don't say anything, I can misbehave.
I can not save.
I can save.
Nobody will find out what my plans were.
But by declaring my goal to save a lot,
and telling it to everybody, that
creates a social-commitment device of sort,
and a soft-commitment device, where
I'm getting socially sanctions.
And that leads to some form of peer pressure.
And people really, in particular in these small villages,
care a lot about what other people think of them.
And that can be very effective in increasing,
in this case, their saving, changing their behavior,
and then increasing people's behavior to deal with shocks.
OK, then very briefly--
I don't have really a time for this anymore--
but one thing you can think about, perhaps a little bit,
is, well, one thing you could do is, you could provide people
with different savings accounts or different types of savings
environment that might change people's behavior.
That might be commitment devices or other types of accounts
or social-commitment devices, peer pressure, et cetera.
Another thing you might be able to say
is, well, why are people so impatient in the first place?
What drives their preferences for their present bias
or their impatience in the first place, the time
inconsistencies?
I have some work in India, one paper on alcohol consumption,
one paper on sleep, which I'll tell you a little bit about,
I think, during the next few weeks,
where essentially, we randomize or vary
whether people are either drinking more versus less.
In some studies, people are incentivized to drink less.
And they have higher sobriety.
That increased savings among rickshaw drivers.
In another study, we offer people the opportunity
to nap at the study office.
So people sleep more.
And when people sleep more, they're
also less present biased and save more money.
So that's to say, essentially, whether people
are impatient versus not depends not only
on your environment, commitment devices, or other things
you have, but perhaps also on internal things, in terms of,
have you slept well, are you drunk,
or in this case, by [? Alan and Ertac, ?]
people are getting students to imagine themselves
in the future.
You can essentially train people to be more patient.
And that's a very different approach
that has at least some success in increasing
people's patience, and therefore getting people
to care more about the future, invest more in education,
save more, et cetera.
There's also another study, that's
one of my favorite studies, that essentially
has some software that makes people see how they will look
when they are in the future, when they're old, and then
looks at people's savings plans, and find some evidence that
doing that, and seeing what you might look like in 40, 50, 60
years, will change how much you want to save because you can
connect to your future self more.
Let me conclude, since I'm out of time.
Many of the poor face both internal
external and internal constraints to savings.
Simply providing people with safe ways to save
can have large effects on people's savings.
Commitment devices, in some ways, can work.
But often, they can also hurt people.
And therefore, they tend to not be super popular,
in particular, when they're hard-commitment devices.
Softer forms of commitment devices,
such as social pressure, like groups, [? roscas, ?]
et cetera, can help people follow through
with their savings plans, and perhaps are
better able or better equipped to mitigate
people's self-control problems.


True or false? You will always want to save, so if you are not saving, you are probably making a mistake, whether due to a lack of self-control, foresight, ability to say no to your family or friends, etc.



True

False



True or false? Savings instruments should always be “illiquid,” i.e., you should not be able to easily pull money out. That way, it is easier to resist the temptation to spend it on frivolous things that get in the way of your savings goal. This is why a cow is a good savings instrument: it is not so easy to sell a cow, let alone a fraction of one to pay for a beer after work.



True

False


True or false? If you take a commitment device, that means the commitment device must always be “welfare improving,” i.e., it must in every case bring you positive utility.



True

False



PROFESSOR: What is the exception to that sort of example?
So I was saying, most people should probably save.
But why might that not be even feasible?
Angela?

STUDENT: Saving isn't all that easy in general, in the sense
that we're subject to many temptations.
And if we don't have the structures helping
us to save, like 401(k) accounts and things like that,
it's very hard to make the decision to save every day.
Or always the same time-inconsistent
preferences [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Right.
So now, there's two different things
I want to distinguish here.
One is about, is it efficient to say,
should the person save overall?
And the argument about people being perhaps too poor
is, in some sense, a reason about,
maybe that person shouldn't save, at least in some cases.
I'm going to return to that in a second.
You are saying, then, well, even if a person would like,
should probably save, or it'd be good for them to save
and they would like to save, they
might not be able to follow through with their plans.
And then we might want to distinguish two types of cases
here.
One is external reasons, external to the person
in some ways-- in a sense, to the household.
That's to say, I might not have a certain savings account.
I might not be--
like, if I paid monthly, for example,
it might be much easier to save than if I
paid daily, and so on.
These are external reasons, potentially.
And then, there are internal reasons that you mentioned,
which is about self-control, I believe.
Can you say more about that?
STUDENT: So it's very--

it's always the same reason we discussed,
that our preferences are kind of inconsistent between today
and tomorrow.
So today, I might value--
I might postpone my consumption not as easily to tomorrow
as I should.
So I'm not inclined to say today because buying something today
seems more appealing.
And it's very hard to plan.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So I might, in principle, say, I really want to save.
I think it's important.
I agree with all of these reasons.
And I have to pay for certain things,
and I worry about shocks and so on.
So I have great plans of saving every day.
But then, in many situations, then,
temptations or other types of things
arise where, essentially, I could purchase a little bit
of this type of good.
Or I could buy some snacks for my children
that really want them.
Or maybe I would like to splurge on some other expenses.
Maybe I would like to drink or smoke or the like.
And then it might be hard to resist that temptation.
STUDENT: Yeah, like, for example, [INAUDIBLE]
is the big example that's given because it would
be so easy to cut on that.
And yet, people are not necessarily ready to do that.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So it's tempting to think that it might
be easy to cut down on it.
But perhaps, if the little tea that you have on a given day
is the one joy that people have in their life,
it might be very hard to actually cut down on it.
But empirically, it seems to be hard.
So these are self-control problems, yeah?
STUDENT: Yeah.
And it's so-- I mean, it's the same as for us.
Like, I have my coffee every day.
And I'm sure I would make a really good investment not
having my coffee every day, but I would be miserable.
So it's, like, everyone.
PROFESSOR: Correct.
So I think [INAUDIBLE] exactly.
To be very clear, this might affect anybody.
These are self-control problems.
Let me go back to the "efficient to save" in a second.
But so there's external reasons to save,
which are reasons of lack of savings accounts.
And many people might not have bank accounts.
I'm going to talk about that in a second.
Let me just [INAUDIBLE] talk about that.
So many people, the poor, don't have bank accounts.
Why is that?

Can't I just go to the bank and get a bank account?
What's the problem?
Rodrigo, yeah?
STUDENT: Yeah.
It might have too high of fees to either open an account
or do things like withdraw.
PROFESSOR: The fees are often high and relatively high.
So if I want to go to the bank and I have $10
and want to deposit them at the bank, and the bank tells me
it's $20 to open an account, then that defeats the purpose.
But now, why are the fees relatively
high for the poor in terms of as a fraction
of the income or a fraction of what they want to invest?
Why is that?
STUDENT: I think it's, like, mostly industry
costs of opening an account.
Regardless of how big the account is, it's constant.
So like, unless you invest--
PROFESSOR: Like, can you give one
example of an administrative cost that happens to anybody?
Suppose I go to the bank, and I want to open an account.
What needs to happen?

So this is more for traditional banking.
I have to go, I have to talk to some person who's going
to maybe check my records.
Maybe they're just going to set up the account,
explain it to me, and so on.
This changes a little bit with digital banking
in terms of in online banking and so on
or through the phone and et cetera,
where you don't necessarily need, actually,
a person dealing with you.
But in a traditional bank, if you go to the bank
and want to open an account, some person--
you will take up some person's time.
And that's pretty much fixed, regardless of
whether you're going to deposit $1,000, $5,
or, like, $1 million.
Now, maybe if you have $1 million, then
maybe they'd give you more time.
But there's at least some fixed cost
that the bank has to pay, essentially,
or to exert per customer.
And if that's fixed, then relatively,
compared to the low-income person's income,
that's a lot of money.
And, therefore, fees are very high.
And, therefore, it's hard to have a bank account.
Were you saying the same?
Yeah, OK.
So that's what we have here-- fixed costs of opening
bank accounts, et cetera.
And then saving at home, then, at the same time,
might have a very low return-- in particular,
if inflation is very high.
If inflation is something like 10%, 20%, 30%, or even higher,
if you just leave your money at home for a year,
then in a year from now, the money will be just worth less.
So you have even a negative as the real rate
of return on your savings.
And so then that would be an external reason not to save.
And I was also saying there's internal reasons not to save.
There's self-control issues, as we just discussed,
which is the idea that people really would like to save.
They would like to have great plans of,
every day, I'm going to save a certain amount of money
or a fraction of my income or the like.
But then, once the future arrives,
then they have trouble following through.
And we're going to talk about that a bit as well.
There's also spouse-family control issues.
What is that?

Yes, [INAUDIBLE]?
STUDENT: This is more of a guess.
But, like, in reading, they talk about--

I guess I remember more of the solution side, which
is giving control to the mother in the household for control.

PROFESSOR: So the important question--
like, who has the control over money?
But suppose I wanted to save at home.
And I have many people in my household,
including my parents-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
my parents, my uncle, and so on.
And I have all this money lying around in my house.
What happens then?
Yes, Evan?
STUDENT: They can use the money for stuff
that they want or need.
Or you have control of the money, and it's--
they're your family.
You care about them.
So money that you are [INAUDIBLE] saving with,
you might just spend it on them.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So you have to say no to a lot of requests, potentially.
There might be some emergency going on in the household
or maybe among the neighbors and so on.
There might be just--
your uncle wants to buy new shoes.
And then I have some money lying around.
I could help with that.
It's very hard to say no to your friends and family or spouse,
for that matter, for these types of requests.
And so now, if you have your money lying around at home,
that's much more difficult to say no to,
compared to if you have it at a bank-- in particular,
in an account that you can't actually access easily.
So that's spousal control issues.
I have another-- yeah?
STUDENT: Sorry.
Do we just kind of embed it in the self-control, too?
PROFESSOR: Correct, correct.
So self-control would-- the distinction is kind of fluid,
but essentially, self-control would be like,
I'm tempted to buy a new good.
Or I'm tempted to drink or smoke or overindulge in sweets
or other types of things.
That's, like, for myself, so my own consumption,
while the spousal control is more about being
able to say no to others.
But there's also a self-control issue related to that.
For example, suppose your children
ask you for sweets every day, and they
keep nagging you and so on.
And then it's easy.
And you have to control yourself to say no because you think
it's just not in the budget or you're just not
able to afford that.
That's, in some sense--
it's a little bit in between.
It's a family control issue in some sense,
but, of course, you could say no.
And then the self-control issue is about saying yes versus no
and giving in when people keep nagging you over time.
Does that make sense?
OK.
Now, what I have at the beginning, still--
and I want to talk a little bit about--
is, it efficient to save?
So why could it be efficient not to save?
And I have this here, which is to say,
if you expect the future to be better than the present,
not saving much might be efficient.
What do I mean by this?
For example, for all of you right now,
presumably, your income is not very high,
at least for most of you.
Unless you are doing other jobs or other work
or other types of investments that you might have.
So should you save right now?

Or who of you is currently saving quite a bit, you think?

So what would economics say about, should you save
or not save?

Yeah?
STUDENT: I mean, so I've got a Roth IRA, which
is-- if people don't know, it's a super high-return savings
account that's really good when you're young.
But if I wasn't, if it was just sitting in a checking account,
it wouldn't really be doing anything [INAUDIBLE]
spend it that way.
So it's just kind of--
that's an opportunity.
PROFESSOR: So if you have a very high-return investment
opportunity-- that's why I said not saving much
might be efficient.
It might be there's a really high-savings opportunity
that you can use, and especially if you start early,
maybe that compounds over time and will
be a lot in the future.
That's a very reasonable reason to save now.
Anybody want to argue why one shouldn't
save very much-- in particular, if one
doesn't have a lot of high-return opportunities?
Yes, Angela?
STUDENT: I'd say that we're getting an education,
so hopefully, we'll make more money in the future.
So we'll have an opportunity to save [INAUDIBLE]..
And so it makes sense right now, for example, to come to MIT
and spend the money rather than save it because we'll
make more money in the future.
And so it makes sense to [INAUDIBLE]..
So right now, it's kind of a time investment.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So this is getting back to what I was saying earlier, coming
back here--
life cycle of consumption and income.
A lot of savings is essentially about equalizing consumption
across time, saving and borrowing.
Which is to say, suppose you're making, right now,
a lot of money, but you know you will not earn a lot of money
in the future.
Then it's very reasonable to save so you can essentially
smooth out-- you can have equal consumption over time, roughly.
But for you guys, overall, currently, I
think mostly it's the opposite.
I hope we're educating you well and you
will have lots of opportunities to make money in the future.
So on average, at least most of you
will make a lot more money in, say, five years from now
or 10 years from now than you make right now.
Right?
And so that means, essentially, that, if anything,
you should probably borrow money.
Now, don't blame me for overborrowing if you do that.
But in principle, you could say, you could smooth out
consumption by essentially borrowing
some money from the future, if that's easy to do,
and spend more money now than you actually
earn at the moment, such that, overall,
your overall expenditures or consumption
will be roughly equal.
OK?
Does that make sense?
OK.
So for some people in particular,
if you expect to be very rich in the future
or much richer than in the present,
not saving might be efficient.
For which country did that at least used
to be the case quite a bit in last few decades?

Which countries grew a lot in the last few decades?

STUDENT: I think the Middle East.
STUDENT: China [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: China in particular.
Yes, exactly.
And so in China, you had-- what is the savings rate in China?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Very high, actually.
So China, in some sense, sort of defies this example
that I was telling you, in some ways.
We might say, well, perhaps China
was growing a lot precisely because people
are saving a lot--
but conditional on growing as much as China did.
It's not obvious that our economists would say, in fact,
people shouldn't necessarily save
as much as they did because the future will
be higher income in any case.
We might return to that in the future.
And so a lack of income, we talked a little bit
about already, as well, as to say being poor per se
should not matter for the decision
to save because the tradeoff here
is between today and tomorrow that
exists at each income level.
Now, the exception-- and this is--
I think I haven't mentioned this before--
is, some people are so poor that they need all the money they
have to survive today, right?
If you just have no money at all right
now, if you don't have any income or other types
of sources-- you have very little income available-- then
it doesn't make sense to say-- if you starve
and have money in your bank account, that's surely not
optimal.
So if you're really, really poor and have just nothing,
then saving becomes extremely hard
because you might essentially need all the money
to be above subsistence level.
PROFESSOR: So next we're going to say--
look at a little bit at how do people actually
save in various settings.
So how do the poor save?
What do people do?

Yes, Olivia.
STUDENT: I think this was mentioned earlier by someone
over there.
But the building the house brick by brick
because, if you're putting the money into bricks now,
you can't spend it on other goods.
There's no more temptation because you've already-- you're
not going to dismantle a room once you've
started building it.
So that example of starting to work on--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so Abhijit's family,
Abhijit Banerjee's family was, in fact, doing that.
Whenever they had more money available, at some point
they built an extra room in their house.
Now exactly as you say, it's an illiquid investment, which
is to say, once you have built already some bricks
or started building a room, it's not something
that you can take away very easily.
Any other examples?

Zion.
STUDENT: Group saving mechanisms.
PROFESSOR: Group savings?
STUDENT: Like a merry-go-round, that kind of thing.
PROFESSOR: And how do they work?
Some of them are called ROSCAs.
What are ROSCAs?

STUDENT: I remember that one.
I remember--
PROFESSOR: That's the same as you described.
STUDENT: Yeah.
So basically, there would be a group of people
who agree to an arrangement.
They would put money in the pot every month.
Then one participant would randomly receive the whole pot.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So it would be like Mikey, Jay, Astrid, you,
and I would be in ROSCA.
We would decide to save every week or every day
or every month-- it can be very flexible-- say, $10.
And then how would this work?
So we'd save, say, every week $10, and then what happens?
STUDENT: Maybe Mikey would spin the wheel,
and then it would land on one of the four of us.
And he would get the whole $40.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we're five, I think.
Astrid and Jay are also in there,
and I'm also contributing, so the five of us.
So there's $50.
Now, the question is, who is, in the first week,
getting the money first?
One version of that is essentially randomizing.
And so Mikey would use his spinning wheel from classes
on Monday and spin the wheel.
And then whoever is first ends up being first.
It's called a fixed order, essentially randomized ROSCA,
where at the beginning we'd randomize.
We'd figure out what is the order.
And it could be random, or we can agree in some other ways.
And then we have a fixed order.
And then every week one person is getting $50 overall.
Is there any other order that you guys know
or that could be--
is there any other way to do this other than randomizing?

Yeah, Daniel.
STUDENT: You could maybe be like, someone
is sick in my family.
I have a very high need for the resources at this time.
It's mainly need based.
PROFESSOR: So you could just say--
you could just claim needs in some ways.
And whoever has an actual need in some sense--
maybe you can verify it in some sense.
And then we say, OK, it's your turn this week.
You can obviously claim it only once in five weeks.
But because we agree that your or my family has the highest
need to do that.
Is there some way of doing this--
so one way would be just to claim it.
Is there some other way of making that happen?

It's called a bidding--
bidding ROSCA.
How does that work?
That's exactly the idea that you say
some people have higher needs than others
in different places.
This could be because you have, say, somebody sick
in your family.
Or it could be like I have this really high-return investment
opportunity, where I need to purchase seeds,
or I need to purchase a machine right now.
And I really value that.
And I'm willing-- I need the money,
or I could use the money a lot more than other people.
What kind of mechanism could you do to make that happen?

Yeah.
STUDENT: You could vote.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You can vote.
Or it's called a bidding ROSCA because you can bid.
But how would that work?
STUDENT: Everybody could go around
and say whether they'd need it that week,
and then everybody votes for--
PROFESSOR: Suppose Mikey and I both say we need it right now.
So what could we do then?
STUDENT: Everybody who put money into it
could vote for one of you.
PROFESSOR: I see.
You can have a vote.
And then you could say I make a case, Mikey makes a case,
and then the other people could vote.
Yeah.
You could do that.
Or you could bid, I guess.
But how would the bidding work?
Lucas, maybe?
STUDENT: I mean, you could potentially,
especially if it's a fixed asset,
like a piece of machinery, you could agree to share it
for a period of time.
You could agree to each take half,
potentially, if it's deemed that you need it for the same reason
right now as well.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You could.
Yes.
Any other ideas?
STUDENT: Yeah.
With the bidding, you potentially--
you could have a minimum bid you have to put in the pot.
You could say it's $10, like you said.
And then to express your need, you could also
put in money beyond that.
And then whoever ends up putting in the most money
gets like the whole pot.
PROFESSOR: Correct.
And so, of course, what Zion was saying,
it's essentially we bid at each time.
I can, of course, only get the money--
so suppose we do five weeks.
Each person can only get the money once.
So it's only about who gets the money first.
And the first week, Mikey and I both are saying
we want the money right now.
Mikey has some business opportunity,
and I have some health expenditures.
We both say we really want the money.
So then it's sort of tricky to say who needs it more.
Economists would say, why didn't you just bid?
Why didn't you just sort of express
your willingness to pay for this money right now?
So then, I would bid, say, $10, and Mikey would bid $15.
Which means essentially, Mikey gets then--
so he has to put in the $15, but he will get the $50 back.
So he gets, I guess, $35 in this case.
And I would get nothing.
I would get it in the future.
Then the $15 go into the pot, and everybody else
would be distributed between everybody else.
Does that make sense?
So suppose-- $15 was not a great number.
Suppose Mikey bid $16, which essentially would mean
that he would have to pay $16.
He'd get the $50, so on that he gets $34.
OK?
He puts in the $16, so then everybody else
gets four extra dollars out of this pot
whenever their time comes.
So I would get, in, say, in the next week,
so I would get four extra dollars from that.
And so then the idea of that is, well, it's
efficient because whoever needs the money most, whoever
has the highest value of their money
right now will be able to bid the most.
And in addition, some people, essentially, get more--

get paid out more.
If I never bid, I just get whatever other people bid.
So I get more money.
It's almost like receiving interest on your payment.
You were saying something else, I think.
STUDENT: Yeah.
It seems like, at least in my opinion,
like a self-defeating process.
Presumably if they need the money the most,
they might also have the least money
available to bid at that time.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I think that's right.
I think the bids are often not super high in some sense.
It doesn't actually happen so much that people
need the money right now.
So a lot of these bids tend to be not super high.
So it's about-- it's like $5 versus $3 or something.
So then I think how much money you actually get.
You're exactly right.
If I really need the money.
I have a big emergency, and I have
to bid $40 to get the $50, that defeats the whole purpose
of the whole thing.
And then I just don't have enough money available and so
on.
But I think in reality, that's not the case.
And you know, bidding ROSCAs are a thing.
People are doing that quite a bit.
But I think in general, people are also
reasonable in the sense that, if Mikey knows
I have a health emergency right now
and he has an investment that he could
make this week or next week and so on, maybe he
will just not bid that high and just
let me get the money overall.
And then next time, I will reciprocate.
STUDENT: Yeah.
I feel like this is a mix of what Julie
said, with the voting kind--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
The voting would take that out because if I
can make a case that my family really needs it right now,
probably most people would agree,
even if Mikey's investment opportunity is amazing.
Yeah.
STUDENT: So I don't know if this is how people actually do it,
but the easiest way I could think of
to fix the bidding ROSCA would be to just do a raffle.
So a ticket is $10, and everybody can buy however
many tickets they want.
And then you're willingness to pay for tickets, you know,
that increases your likelihood of winning the whole thing.
PROFESSOR: I see.
So that's right.
But I think it could also be then inefficient because I
buy 20 tickets and you have only one,
you could still get the money.
And then I still have my health issues and you have the money
and so on.
But you're right.
Maybe that would be also perceived
as more fair and so on.
Yeah.
STUDENT: Something I'm having trouble understanding is--
maybe I'm just not understanding the relative size of a pot
to a ticket or a bid.
But if you need to spend money now--
or if you need money now for that kind of large expenditure,
how can you afford to put it into a bid?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So essentially, I take it away from the money
that I'm getting out anyway.
Suppose we all put in $10.
It's five people overall, so whatever money I
will get paid out will be $50.
Right?
And so now I'm saying I'm willing to pay $10, which
essentially, if I don't have it right now,
it just means, effectively, I get $40 instead of $50.
Right?
But I don't need any liquidity right now.
Because exactly as you say, if I don't have money right now
and really need it, then I don't have $10 anyway.
Javy, yes.
STUDENT: Could we also structure the bidding
like an interest repayment on a loan instead?
PROFESSOR: Say more.
STUDENT: So instead of putting the money up front now,
you pay the bid as an interest on your loan down the line?

PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
You could say that, but then there's-- exactly.
You could say I'm willing to pay.
I'm going to just pay $2 more for any of my future payments
into the ROSCA next week or next month or whatever.
Right?
If I don't have the money right now.
Yeah.

PROFESSOR: Yeah.
STUDENT: It feels like a ROSCA is just more work than just
normal banking.
So wouldn't it cost a lot to manage all these monies
and cost a lot of money to--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we're going to talk about in a second
about-- let me actually get there right now.
I'm going to just skip this and say,
what are the advantages of ROSCAs over, say,
saving at home.
So you're exactly right.
And this is the disadvantage we're going
to talk about in a second.
You're exactly right that in some of these ROSCAs,
in particular if they're big and complicated,
you need to make sure that you have a good accountant
and that you organize and so on because otherwise you
end up in a huge mess, where essentially everybody paid
in some money.
They can't remember how much was paid in.
They got into fights and so on.
And so that's a bad situation to be in.
And good accountants in some ways
are hard to come by in many places,
including, say, in villages in India.
And so if you have somebody who's
very careful and good with math and good with numbers
and so on, a ROSCA--
and they would do it, probably, for free
if they don't have that much other things to do,
then I think that's a very good solution.
If you don't have a good accountant and so on,
that might be quite messy.
But let me return to that in a second.
What are advantages of ROSCAs overall?
Why are ROSCAs quite popular?
ROSCAs are very popular in many places of the world.
Why is that?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess, similar to the saving thing,
it eliminates your ability to spend that money now
when you know you have to put it in the pot every week
because there's that social pressure that other people are
relying on you to help them out with their expenses.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
There's peer pressure in our village.
And often these are people that I know pretty well.
And so if I'm just saying, well, this week
I don't feel like saving.
Mikey and my ROSCA friends will not be very happy with me.
And so there's peer pressure that gets me to save,
which makes it easier to save than saving on your own
in your bank account or at home, in many places.
Yeah, Lucas.
STUDENT: In the series who are not physically
holding cash at home.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the money is out of my hands.
Somebody needs to deal with the ROSCA pot and put it somewhere.
But at least four other people in a ROSCA of five
will not have this issue lying around.
Yes, Sam.
STUDENT: I think it, at least somewhat,
combats the time inconsistent preferences.
PROFESSOR: How?
STUDENT: So instead of--
I guess, if you save in your home,
the savings would grow linearly with how much you put in.
You have outsized returns at a point that is
relatively near in the future.
And so even though you value it less,
the fact that it's so much bigger than what you have
at that point evens it out.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So there's two reasons I think why ROSCAs might
help with time inconsistency.
One is about the peer pressure that makes you put in the money
in the first place.
Today I might not want to save.
I might buy ice cream instead.
But again, my ROSCA friends will get really mad at me if I
don't.
And therefore, I'll do it.
The second part is what Lucas was
saying, which is, well, I might not actually have access
to the ROSCA money right now because it's in some ROSCA
pot with my friend.
And so then it also limits some temptations of spending savings
because I don't have so much money lying around.
And then third, perhaps, there's also once you get the money,
it's a larger pot of money.
And it might be easier to invest that
into something useful than if you get $10 or small amounts
at each point in time.
That's easier to squander or spend on little things
here and there.
STUDENT: Maybe this is a secondary effect,
but it also might have a positive utility
from hoping to be the winner of the big pot.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I think there's something like looking forward
to some big, big expenses.
It's, in some sense, why people play the lottery.
Notice that ROSCAs are small.
We're going to talk about in a second why that is.
But usually, ROSCAs are relatively small in size.
They're not really helping you buy a house or something,
or for big expenses.
OK.
So we talked about peer pressure.
What else?

Why are ROSCAs good?
What do we like about ROSCAs?
Yes, Astrid.
STUDENT: It still regulates your saving habit
because you have to put that amount of money
in that particular concept stays via only just
put some random amount of money at a random time.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
That's a nice idea.
So exactly.
So it has very-- it's very rigid in some ways, which
is, I think, good and bad.
The good thing about it is, essentially exactly, it
builds savings habit.
Every week or every month or whatever our ROSCA schedule is,
we have to put in money.
And that's just a thing that happens regularly.
And having regular savings habits in particular,
when you read books about personal finance, et cetera,
a lot of the personal finance gurus will tell you,
building habits is really important.
Economists actually talk about this less.
But I think in reality or in practice,
that's quite important.
There's one last advantage of ROSCAs
that hasn't been mentioned, which anybody can
think of what that might be?
Suppose we want to all buy something for $50
and we save on our own.
Think about how long that will take us versus how long it
will take us in the ROSCA.

Yeah.
STUDENT: If people stick to the $10 thing,
I know it will take me five weeks.
As opposed to now it will take me just less time, so one week.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So everybody on their own will take five weeks exactly
because they get $10 per week, and it takes them five weeks.
Now, in the fixed order or bidding ROSCA,
depends-- say you have a fixed order ROSCA,
one person will get it immediately, or after one week
already.
The next person will get after two weeks.
The third person will get after three weeks and so on.
So the average amount of time it takes
is something like 2 and 1/2 weeks
roughly, so you will essentially get it faster.
Essentially, it's sort of getting credit in some sense.
You get something that you can purchase earlier.
And the ROSCA works in that way.
And the last person gets it after five weeks.
But they would have gotten it after five weeks
anyway at the speed that they're saving.
So we talked about these already.
So it makes it easier to save for larger expenditures.
For example, helps with self-control issues.
Makes it easier to save larger amounts quickly.
And the peer pressure might also be helpful.
What are limitations of ROSCA, or what are ROSCAs
not good for?
Why might you not be in a ROSCA?
So I think Daniel, I believe, was saying already,
there's accounting issues.
It's kind of like a hassle and complicated.
And if you don't have a good accountant
and if you're messy with money and so on,
then that might be tricky.
And you might get a lot of trouble with your ROSCA friends
if you do that.
Any other ideas?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I mean, yeah, maybe there's
a fee to be in one, like 10% or something.
I don't know.
And then if you're able to, you could mimic a fixed order ROSCA
in your house every month.
PROFESSOR: I see.
You're just saying you could recreate it yourself?
Now notice then, maybe you might not have the peer pressure
and so on.
But in principle, you could try to do this in your house
or with your friends in some sense.
Usually, there's no fees in the sense
that it's just a group of people who do it.
It's just somebody has to organize.
Sometimes maybe it varies over time who's--
there's sort of admin costs, if you want, as in somebody
did some hassle to do it.
Now, why do we not see ROSCAs for people buying a house, so
huge expenses?

Yeah, Daniel.
STUDENT: It's harder to let go of a large sum of money
for someone else to get something.
PROFESSOR: Interesting.
STUDENT: And then you have to wait to get.
And then not just that, but if I was the accountant
and you were giving me money to afford a house,
I'd feel like you're relying on them to have
so much integrity because--
PROFESSOR: Yes.
STUDENT: I feel like the temptation
to just disappear with that money would be ridiculous.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So if Mikey and friends and I were in a ROSCA, and say
we pay like $1,000 or more every week or month.
And if Mikey were our accountant,
at some point he'll be like, that's
a lot, a lot of money in this ROSCA.
Goodbye.
No more recitation.
He's gone with his money from my ROSCA.
You're exactly right.
It just requires a lot of integrity,
a lot of-- essentially, you have very high incentives
at some point to just-- especially once you've
been-- either if you're the accountant,
you just run away with all of the money.
Or if you just have been paid out already--
notice, somebody gets paid first and others get paid later.
You might just say, oh, thanks very much.
I'm using that money, and goodbye.
Essentially, you need a lot of trust,
and you need a lot of way of punishing people
in some way socially or in other ways if they misbehave.
And that's often difficult to do.
And therefore, the size of ROSCAs
tend to be relatively small.
That's not to say they're not useful,
but they tend to be relatively small.
And last thing I think we talked a little bit about already
is flexibility.
So the lack of flexibility, the rigidity is, in some sense,
helpful for building new habits.
But if you're somebody who has very irregular income,
then this inflexibility is not very helpful
because sometimes you have a lot of money,
sometimes you don't have money.
And then you get in trouble with your ROSCA friends
again because you can't pay.
PROFESSOR: So now let me go back to the other types
of savings vehicles.
So ROSCA is very popular.
What other products or types of features exist?
We talked about brick-by-brick already,
but what else do we have?

If you went to India, what would you
see in terms of how do people save?
Yes?
STUDENT: I think it was--
I'm unsure if I think it was a thing about women in India
saving through larger bills.
So they would put them, for example--
I'm not sure.
I read this somewhere, but I can't remember where.
And that they would save stuff in larger bills
so that they wouldn't be tempted to spend it.
And it's easy to save in larger bills
because you're not tempted to spend it,
but also it's easier to store.
So they put it under the mattress or whatever.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So there's essentially just saving up your home
under the mattress, et cetera.
Now that still has-- other people
might try to get the money from you and so on
and the family, et cetera.
But it might be easier and less--
compared to having huge amounts of bills because then,
once you have a lot of very small bills,
it's much easier to give it away to people in the family
and so on.
But I think at home, under the mattress, et cetera,
is one way people save.
What else do we have?

What about jewelry and gold?
What do people do that?

Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: Especially if the currency is pretty variable
and inflation is high, stuff like gold--
one, it's very dense, so there's a lot
of value in something pretty small,
so it doesn't take a lot of storage.
And two, it hold its value very well.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Gold holds its value.
Usually, it's somewhat, at least, protected
in inflation and so on because the value of gold
will also go up if prices go up and so on.
And as you say, it's very dense and you don't
have to have a huge piece of--
or pieces of whatever bills and so around.
And you can actually wear it on--
potentially, you can wear it.
The jewelry, at least, and so on, you can.
And gold is gold.
It's very easy to verify what it is and so on.
And that's been very popular as well.
Now there's other sort of financial savings.
There's things called moneyguards, savings collector,
and self-help groups.
What are those?

Any of these-- moneyguards, savings collectors,
or self-help groups.

So let's start with the self-help groups.
That's essentially a form of a ROSCA, just more flexible
in some sense.
That's just to say I might have my three friends.
We all want to say we meet every Wednesday
and talk about ways to save, maybe remind
each other to save, but one version of that would be,
then, let's do a ROSCA and have a clear structure.
But it could also just be we're trying
to save in some other ways, jointly or individually,
and just support each other.
And I save $10, and then Mikey will tell me great job
and motivate me to save more.
And maybe it motivates him to save more as well.
Then there's other versions of that,
which are moneyguards-- somebody in the neighborhood who
acts as a bank, so they keep money at their home.
Or savings collector-- somebody in neighborhood
collects money and deposits it at the bank.
And that helps with the fixed costs
because if you sort of collect the money
from 20 people in your village and put it to the bank,
then you can only have to pay fees for one person as opposed
to for 20 people.
Of course, again, that leads to issues of accounting, issues
with reliability, and so on.
And then, more recently, there's a lot
more phone or internet-based digital savings
accounts where, essentially, you can save on your phone
or on the internet, more broadly.
That's been a lot more popular in recent years.
And that, of course, deals with a lot
of the issues that have come up because, maybe, there's
fewer fixed costs, for example.
It's just much easier administratively and so on.
You don't have to go to an actual bank, et cetera.
Finally, there's microcredit.
Yes, Mikey?
STUDENT: One more that I don't remember
if this is in the book, but you could
buy an animal as a savings.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
People do that a lot--
for example, cows.
Now you have to have quite a bit of money
to buy a cow in the first place.
So you have to figure out how to get that much money overall.
But people do that.
Why is it a good idea to invest in a cow?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Because like you could always
sell the cow to get that money back,
but then, also, the cow is drinking passive income
in the form of [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: So it's an asset that has
certain returns-- in particular, milk, or, for other animals,
that might be helpful on a daily basis to support your family.
Now can you sell half a cow?
No, of course.
And so this is kind of similar to the strategy
Angela was saying.
If you have very large bills only, what you can do
is you can sort spend it all in some ways.
Of course, you can change the bills in your case.
But if you have a cow, you can either sell
the entire cow or not.
But you can't sell, like, 1/10 of a cow.
So if you just want a small amount to buy ice cream,
you're not going to sell your cow to do that.
So essentially, it's illiquid, which also potentially helps
you with self-control problems.
But that's also a very popular thing to do.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Has there been studies of if ROSCAs helped wellbeing
or how much?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, there's quite a bit of work on ROSCAs overall.
We're going to talk a little bit about one of the--

so one of the studies we're going to talk about
is giving people access to savings accounts overall.
But one of the studies, towards the end,
we're going to also talk about ROSCA
is actually helpful for increasing health expenditures.
Do people now purchase more preventative health goods
and are better able to deal with shocks?
I think one thing that hasn't been studied so much
is the question of are people, overall,
better off in some ways in the sense
that ROSCAs might be good in terms of helping you save,
but maybe it makes you feel terrible every week because you
get really stressed about your ROSCA members being mad at you
and so on.
I think that's been less studied overall,
but I think there's plenty of work trying to understand
if ROSCA is useful, why are they there, and so on,
and what are their purposes.
But let me get back to that in a bit.
Now let me very briefly talk about microcredit
as a savings instrument.
Why might microcredit be a good savings instrument
or how does that work?
It seems like the opposite of savings,
but somehow people use it a lot for savings as well.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Essentially, this is [INAUDIBLE],, specifically money
[INAUDIBLE] later.
They just take out a bunch of money,
and they can buy whatever they need and slowly pay it back.
[INAUDIBLE]

PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's exactly right.
So essentially, if I wanted to buy a TV,
I could save a lot of money until I have a TV,
and maybe that's tedious for me to do for various reasons
that we already discussed.
Or I could just go to a store and say,
hey, I would like to buy this TV and then
buy it, essentially, on credit.
I take a loan.
Now it could be from a microcredit organization
or from a moneylender or from the store itself.
And then I just pay back in weekly or monthly installments.
It's also very popular in the US--
in weekly or monthly installment, I pay it back.
Now the advantage, of course, is that I
get the TV right now, not in a year from now,
until I have saved it.
Another advantage is that now, in some sense,
somebody else is bugging me to get the money.
So in some sense, the responsibility
has now shifted to the other person who's
getting the money from me.
A downside, of course, is that it's often quite expensive
to do.
Instead of getting positive interest on my savings,
as I accrue the savings over time,
I have to now pay high interest-- often very
high interest, 20% or higher even per year.
And that's a very expensive thing to do.
But, of course, you also get the good earlier.
So that's also a very popular thing that people have done.
OK, we talked about ROSCAs already.
So then let me speed up a little bit
since I want to tell you about the exciting research papers.
So what are other important features of savings product?
We talked a little bit about liquidity already.
It's important to understand whether a savings
product is liquid or not.
Liquidity can be good and bad.
In some ways, liquidity can be very good in the sense like,
if I want to save and I worry about health shocks,
or I worry about a drought or really bad things
where I need money right now, unexpectedly, you
want your savings to be liquid so you can deal
with these types of shocks.
Liquidity can be bad if you think
you have self-control problems because, then, you
want to have illiquid assets.
You want to have a cow or you want
to have bricks in your house and so on.
You want to not be able to access
your money because if it's not accessible,
then self-control problems are not so much of an issue.
So it depends a little bit what the purpose or what
the situation of the person is with the liquidity is
good or bad.
Then, as I talked already, there's
needs for careful accounting in for many of these ROSCAs
or other types of organizations.
And then social pressure turns out
to be a really important feature, which
we're going to return to.
This is just the idea that other people--
you announce to everybody else what your savings plans are,
and other people, in some ways, one way or the other,
will hold you accountable and perhaps will
think of you less if they learn that you haven't followed
through with your plan, or they just get mad at you
because they're in your ROSCA.
Now we're going to talk about different ways
to increase savings.
We're going to talk about addressing
external constraints.
This is people don't have savings accounts.
And then, next, we're going to talk
about addressing internal constraints-- people find
it difficult to save regularly, for example,
due to self-control problems or people within the household.
Let me briefly tell you about the access to savings study,
and then I'm going to take a break for a few minutes.
So a first study that's a very simple and very nice
study by Pascaline Dupas and John Robinson--
Pascaline Dupas, already you know from various [INAUDIBLE]
studies from before that come across you before--
is just the question of do people not have a secure place
to save, and does that lead to a worse business success?
So these are bicycle, taxi drivers, men in market vendors,
women in Kenya, Western Kenya.
And they are asked to keep financial diaries and logbooks.
And then the research question that the authors were asking
is, do people not save because they don't have
a secure place for the money?
And does not having a secure place for your money
impede business success?
So is it, A, just not having money,
does it lead to lower savings?
And then does that have sort of downstream consequences--
sort of a version of what you're asking somewhat differently.
Does it affect people's lives in some way--
in this case, their business?
So what they do is the treatment.
So it's treatment and control-- that's a randomized control
trial--
that in the treatment group, the authors or the study team
paid for the application fee and minimum balances
for accounts at a local bank.
They go to a local bank, started a bank account.
You can put in your money there, and they pay the application
fee and minimum balances.
This is a no-interest bank account with sizable withdrawal
fees which means, essentially, the actual interest rate
is actually negative, as in if you put in 100 Kenyan shillings
and take them out a week later, you have to pay a fee.
So you get less than 100 back.
So the interest rate is actually negative.
So if you put in money here, that means,
really, you really do not have a different place
to put them the money.
That seems to be you even accept the negative interest rate.
So now what they do is then they just measure take-up--
how much money are people putting in there?
This is a CDF, a cumulative distribution function.
It's very easy-- how do we read this?
Essentially, what the y-axis shows
is the percent of people who have a certain amount saved
or below.
For example, what you see here is there--

so these are women in red and men in blue.
So you see here that, essentially, about 50%
of people for both men and women have essentially saved nothing.
They put in zero money overall.
And then you see, for example, for different amounts--
so for example, here, you see this is 60%.
So 60% of people have essentially
saved something like 200 shillings and less,
meaning that the remaining share of the people, 40% of people,
have saved at least 200 shillings.
And then these are two graphs because the axes
are very large.
But essentially, what you see here,
then, is you see the distribution for women
is much further to the right than it is for men.
That is to say, a lot of the men actually don't say very much.
Something like 95% of men save something
like less than 5,000 shillings.
So that's not very much.
When you look at women, women save a lot more.
So something like 90% of women save 50% of less-- means,
like, 10% of women save something
like 5,000 shillings or more.
And when you look at something like 10,000 shillings,
about something like--
so this is the share here-- something
like 7% of people save at least 10,000 shillings.
That is to say, a large fraction of people--
so a lot of people here at zero.
They saved exactly nothing.
They don't use this account at all.
For many people, it's actually not useful at all.
Nothing happens.
But there's a share of people in particular in women that
save a lot of money in there.
You can see here, these are people--
this is something here--
a few of these data points, essentially 40,000-50,000
shillings or more.
So some women, in particular, have a lot of money
that they save in this account.
And this, then, leads to increased overall savings.
So at the end of the study, they measure people's
overall savings, including what's in this account--
increased productive investments and increased
private expenditures.
What does that mean?
So people save more money in this account.
They have more overall savings.
Then they make more productive investment.
They invest more in their business.
And then, as a result, later, they have more money overall,
including more money for private expenditures
for their own consumption.
And that's true for some fraction of women.
So there are some of these market vendors, female market
vendors, that essentially have no safe place
to put their money anywhere.
So they prefer to put their money--
somewhere like 10-15% of women, they prefer to put their money,
and a lot of money, into these savings accounts that have no
interest but have a negative--
have a fee.
So they have essentially negative interest overall.
And that allows them to expand their business,
to invest more in their business,
to have more overall savings, and to have
higher expenditures at the end.
So that suggests there is really important barriers
to savings investments for women,
in particular market women in this context, that
seem quite important.
That doesn't seem to be the case for men.
It's not quite clear where this difference is coming from.
Perhaps it has to do with constraints
within the household, which is to say maybe
for men within the household, it's
easier to say no to things to their spouse
or to other members in the family or their neighbors
and so on.
Well, for women, it might be much harder because the husband
comes and says, I want the money now,
and then it's very hard to avoid that
without violence or other types of problems.
PROFESSOR: So far, this is about essentially--
this is about external constraints
in terms of just not having access to savings accounts.
And once you provide with these savings accounts,
people are doing better.
So this is all about people's external environments
in a sense, that if people had-- everybody had free savings
accounts, presumably they would do a lot better
or would be able to save more, at least
for women in this case.
But it's nothing about internal constraints.
So what about internal constraints?
We talked about this already.
Anybody remember the story of Ulysses and the Sirens
that, I think, Esther mentioned already
during the health session?
Anybody remember what the story is?
Yes, please.
STUDENT: Yeah.
Like, he wanted to hear the sirens sing,
but he knew it was going to be too beautiful
and he'd want to jump off the boat
and get into the water with them.
But since he still wanted to hear,
he had them tie him to the mast of the ship.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And in particular, so he was tied to the mast.
Exactly.
And what did the rowing people do?
STUDENT: Covered their ears.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So there was not only the looks, I guess,
but also the sound of them.
So I think he actually wanted to listen to them.
But he just knew that he would not be able to resist.
And I guess the rowing crew were just not allowed to listen
and had their ears covered and, therefore, were also
not falling for them.
And so this is essentially the idea of a commitment device.
Can somebody define or tell me what a commitment device is?

Yeah.
STUDENT: In this case, it would be tying himself to the pole.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but what is a commitment device?
What's the definition of a commitment device?
STUDENT: It keeps you accountable.
And it's restrictive to the point that it's like a binary
up until--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
There's more continuous versions of that.
But essentially, the idea is that you
have a certain behavior in the future that you do not--
that you know that you might engage in the future
if you don't restrict yourself in certain ways.
And you have some preferences for your future self.
You do not want your future self to engage in certain behaviors,
be that spending too much money, be that jumping into the water,
or be that doing all sorts of other things
that you don't want yourself to do in the future.
You know that your future self will disagree.
Your future self will say, oh, these sirens sound amazing.
I've got to jump into the water or whatever.
And therefore, you know already that you're going
to misbehave in the future.
And therefore, you want to change your future self's
behaviors.
The way you might be able to do that,
essentially, is to restrict your options.
In this case, very extremely, you'd
just tie yourself to the mast.
You're just not able to do anything, or you just cannot--
you cannot move, essentially.
And therefore, the option of falling for the sirens
is essentially not available anymore.
It's just taking away certain options.
Another version of a commitment device
would be to make certain options more costly.
You could say, for example, in savings account,
one option to have a commitment savings account is to say you
cannot take out money from an account until a prespecified
time.
That's exactly the equivalent or the same thing
as tying yourself to the mast, is taking away an option.
If I say I have a savings account,
and I can only take out money on June 30.
And before that, I cannot do this.
Now essentially, if tomorrow or next week
or whenever I come and I say I want to take out money,
I just do not have that option anymore.
And people might choose commitment savings accounts
precisely because they know that, if they are not choosing
a commitment savings account, they
will take out the money prematurely and spend it
on stuff they don't want themselves
to spend in the future.
So you might say I can only take out the money,
say, next year or the like.
We're just taking away certain options.
That's sort of a discrete version of, essentially,
it's either 1 or 0.
You can do it or you cannot do it.
Another version of this would be to just make it more expensive.
You can say there's a 10% withdrawal fee or the like.
But essentially, you can take out the money,
but it's very costly to do so.
OK?
Any other commitment devices that you guys know?
What about spending too much money online?
What commitment devices exist for that?

Yeah.
STUDENT: I mean, aren't there browser blockers,
where you can block specific sites so [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
There's browser blockers.
There's also whole system-wide blockers, essentially,
where you just cannot visit certain sites or just
don't work or the like.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Social-- I personally will be like, OK,
if I do this--
I'll tell my friends my goals.
And if I break them, I'll tell my friends
that I broke them or something.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
That's very interesting.
And those friends are they--
what kind of features do your friends
need to have to make that work?
So, you're saying some--
she's asking some friends about goals she wants to do.
And then there's some form of social or other sanctions
from the friends in case she doesn't follow through.
So what kind of friends do you need for that?
STUDENT: They also follow through?
PROFESSOR: They follow through, and they're also
strict with you.
So I used to have, in grad school,
I had a good office mate.
And we would have these commitment devices
where there's some website called StickK.
And the website StickK is as follows.
You can put down some money, say $100,
and then say if you don't specify an action, which
would be write the draft of your paper,
if you do not do this action, the $100 go
to some prespecified purpose, for example,
to the pro-smoking association or like the pro other types
of purposes associations, so money that you really do not
want to go to that cause, if you don't follow through.
And then you need a referee, which was, in this case,
my office mate.
You need a referee who decides whether or not you
have actually followed through.
Now, anybody can guess what the problem with this
potentially is?
So I'm saying until Friday night I'm
going to write at least five pages of my paper draft.
And otherwise, $100 will go to this association
that I don't agree with.
What is the problem potentially?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I mean, your friend probably also
doesn't want it to go to the organization
so they can be relaxed with you.
PROFESSOR: Correct.
So in all of those cases, I would not
follow through and then persuade my friend
and say, look, I'm going to buy you dinner,
but you just say I followed through.
And then, of course, if in particular, he also
wants the money not to go to that cause, he might agree.
And he did, in fact.
So the whole thing sort of unravels.
So you need strict friends in some ways, maybe
friends who also do it, or maybe they judge you and so on,
potentially.
But exactly, that's exactly, actually,
the type of commitment device that we're going
to talk about in a second.
OK.
So what does this paper do?
It's a very important paper in this literature by Nava Ashraf,
Dean Karlin, and Yin.
These are clients of the Philippine
Bank, randomly selected.
A subset of those were offered a commitment savings product.
What is this commitment savings product.
It was called SEED--
S-E-E-D. That's sort of just an abbreviation,
where people were encouraged to save plus had a commitment
offer, which is clients can restrict access to deposits
upon opening the account.
So you open an account, and you can
say I want to have no restrictions,
and then you have no restrictions whatsoever.
Or you can say I would like to have some restrictions, where,
for example, I can only get the money
at either a specific date.
For example, people chose Christmas, birthday,
celebration in particular, but also education,
say, for example, whenever the school
fees are due for my child.
There are also other things like vacation, travel, and so on.
So all kinds of things where essentially dates
are specific dates, where you fixed exactly a certain date.
And then there could be also goals,
where you say I want to have enough money
to be able to travel to place X. And then
once you have enough money, then you use that for travels.
So people specified date-based goals
and say that would be, say, only, like, on June 30
I can get the money, or amount-based goals,
where you say I have to save at least $1,000.
Before that, I cannot take out the money.
And the rationale for that would be
like I want to purchase a certain good
or I want to pay for certain things for my child,
and I need $1,000 to do this.
So only once I have reached $1,000 I can take out money.
And I worry that I may take out the money earlier
for other things that are not my children's education
or other types of purposes and take out the money prematurely.
And I'm not able to do that in this type of account.
Everybody clear on what this account does?
OK.
So now, what do they find?
On average, these commitment savings help people save more.
So there was about a 30% take up rate, a little bit less
than that, either for date-based or amount-based goals.
Take up here means that people chose a target
but also put in some money [INAUDIBLE]
or different savings accounts.
So they put in some money into this account,
where the money was stuck, at least for a while.
Second, offering people-- so now this is randomized.
So sorry, I should have said this.
There's a SEED treatment, and there's also
a marketing treatment.
So in the SEED treatment, people are encouraged to save.
So you say, OK, savings is great.
You should all save.
Why don't you start an account?
And this is really useful.
And savings is good for you, and so on and so forth.
So people are encouraged or nudged to save, but then also,
on top of that, got the commitment offer.
This treatment group number one.
Treatment group number two is only the encouragement
but no commitment offer.
The idea here is that, well, in the first treatment,
if you find people are doing better than in the control
treatment, maybe that's because of the commitment savings
account or maybe it's because there's also this encouragement
to save.
So comparing one and two gives you
only the effect of the commitment savings account.
OK?
So now what did they find?
So people used these accounts and put in money
and specified these goals.
Offering commitment savings, the commitment savings product,
significantly increased savings.
So people saved a lot more compared
to the marketing treatment.
This is treatment group one versus two.
And finally-- and this is a little bit in the weeds--
survey responses to "would you rather
have money now versus later," people who seem impatient
or people who really seem to need money now
seem to predict commitment take up.
This is the idea that a self-control-- if I
ask you do you want $100 now versus $120 in a week from now,
if you say $100 now, you might have self-control issues.
Or it might be really sort of a credit constraint.
That predicts whether people take out
this commitment device.
You can mostly ignore that.
But overall, what this says is essentially
is to say, offering people these devices overall
can be really helpful.
On average, people increased their savings by quite a bit.

PROFESSOR: Can anybody think of some problems here?
What are some downsides, potentially, of these accounts?
So we're saying great, people on average save more.
That's terrific.
Everybody should get these accounts.
We should offer them or require everybody
to have these accounts now.
Any thoughts on that policy?

Yeah?
STUDENT: I mean, it helps to save,
but it doesn't really help for unexpected shocks.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so there's one thing is it's
very rigid in the sense that if you have an unexpected shock,
you tied your hands right now.
So in the case of our friend here, [INAUDIBLE],, possibly,
if there was some other shock, some other ship
were coming and trying to conquer them or whatever
or steal stuff from them, he would
have been stuck at the mast, and his sailors
would not be able to listen or hear him at all.
So, in some sense, if you have unexpected shocks happening,
hard commitment devices are not a good idea
because now you're very inflexible.
In this case, I guess, if you have your money stuck in this
treatment, now you just cannot get the money until Christmas
Day, and then you might not be able to pay for your health
or other types of expenses.
Any other idea why it's bad?
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: It's pretty vulnerable to financial risk.
So if there's crazy inflation in that time, [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: I see, so if you think it's a bad--
so there's some interest, but I think the interest is not high.
So if just saving becomes a bad idea for whatever reason,
again, you can't take out the money-- sort
of a different form of a shock.
What about self-control issues?
What if you have really, really bad self-control issues
and you have put in money into this account?
So one thing I haven't told you for these accounts-- often,
for ethical reasons in particular in these studies,
but in general, also, in these types of accounts,
if you really come and want the money
you can take out the money often at some fee.
So it's actually not that fixed.
And so now, in your case, I guess
if you have health issues or other types of problems,
you can get the money out, but you have to pay the fee,
and that's kind of bad.
But if you also have really, really
bad self-control problems, you can also get the money out,
but again, you have to pay this fee.
Now notice that in that situation,
then, you have not saved until Christmas for the presents
for your children and so on.
And you have paid the fee of, say, 10% or 20%
or other large fee that, essentially, you
have to take out.
So then you're worse off than you
would have been if you just never even used
this account in the first place.
So for people who have lots of shocks or people
have really bad self-control problems
and for the unforeseen self-control problems,
this type of account might actually be not good for them.
In fact, they might be bad for them.
And there's a very nice study by [INAUDIBLE] John
that sort of does exactly that.
So for a lot of these commitment devices--
and this is similar to the commitment
device that described to you with my friend in the office--
people have great intentions.
They say, oh, I really want to do this.
I have great plans of writing my paper.
I have great plans for doing my problem sets.
I have great plans of studying and so on.
They often follow through or don't follow through
with these plans, even if they have commitment devices chosen
for them.
So in this case here--
and so this is what people refer to as partial naivety.
That's a bit of a jargon here, but essentially,
people know they have self-control problems,
therefore, they choose the commitment device.
But the self-control problems turn out
to be a lot worse than they thought.
They thought, OK, paying $100 to this other type of organization
and so on would be enough to sort of discipline
their behavior.
But then, actually, it's not strong enough.
People do misbehave anyway.
And then, essentially, you haven't written the paper
at the end.
Suppose my friend were actually following
through with this whole plan, was stricter on me.
Then, I haven't written the paper,
plus I have to pay $100 to this organization
that I don't want to pay money to.
So I'm worse off than if I hadn't ever used
this commitment device before.
And that's what people mean by partially naive.
People are naive or partially--
they understand that they have self-control problems,
but partially, they're also naive.
So this is a field experiment in the Philippines--
again, very similar to the experiment
in which the seed treatment took place where, again, there's
a positive effect of offering the commitment
contract on savings.
So if you look at just the overall group, treatment group
overall and control group overall,
the treatment group does save more than the control group,
as I just showed you in the previous experiment.
But there's about half of the people who have a commitment
contract, who've chosen a commitment contract,
actually default early.
They essentially say, oh, I said I'm
going to only put in the money until Christmas,
but then, in November, at some point,
they say I really need the money.
They pay a penalty and take the money out early.
So they don't reach the goal and they pay the penalty.
And those people are actually worse off
than they would have been if they never even had been
offered this commitment contract because it
didn't reach their goal and they paid the penalty.
Does that makes sense?
Any questions on this?
So now you might say, well, then, the key
challenge essentially-- and this is
sort of where the literature is right now,
I think, is you need to find some ways of offering
commitment devices to people for whom they're helpful.
So some people clearly benefit in some situations.
For some people, these commitment devices are great.
They work well.
Maybe they work well for you, maybe because your friends
are strict.
But for others, they're not working.
So it would be useful to figure out,
can we target people properly, in a sense?
For some people, it works.
And for others, it doesn't.
And maybe we can figure out how to target these properly.
Or maybe more flexible commitment devices could help.
Maybe the problem is that the commitment devices
are very strict.
They have very harsh penalties.
I have to pay 10% or 20% of my savings,
and that's very strict, and that's a lot of monetary fees.
So maybe we have more flexible commitment accounts
that could be helpful.
PROFESSOR: So then-- and this is a version
of this, Dupas-Robinson now in a second paper.
This is a very similar setting, but a second paper
trying to look at what kinds of savings accounts
are most effective in increasing savings.
And does this lead to higher, not-- sorry, or--
sorry.
Does this lead to higher health expenditures and thus
a better health?
Does not having access to good savings
account lead to lower health expenditures and worse health?
And so now what they do is they have an experiment in Western
Kenya where they randomly offer different kinds of savings
devices to people where they're going to look at the outcome.
And this is now a general population
where the outcome is usage of these savings devices,
or people actually using them.
Second, are they investing, and does access,
or getting access to these savings
accounts help people invest in preventative health
investments?
So for example, purchasing bed nets.
And does it help people to deal with acute health emergencies?
Notice we have two different things here.
One is about making investments that are good for you
in the future, preventative health investments, which
is bed nets, or other types of things that are good for you
in the future, and to say helping people
with acute health emergency.
For example, if somebody has malaria right now,
you need some medication, or you need to go to the doctor,
is it helpful to have a good savings account to help you
with these types of shocks?
The motivation for this type of work
is from what you had seen before from previous work
from Pascaline Dupas.
You saw several papers that show once people
have given bed nets for free, they're happy about them.
They use them, they're helpful in reducing malaria and so on.
So people are very happy to have health goods once you give them
to them for free, but people are very hesitant to buy them
in many situations.
And often one situation that they often--
or one reason why people say I can't really-- or I'm not
really buying is they say, I don't have enough money.
Then you might say, well, couldn't you get some credit?
Often, people are also very credit constrained.
There's not that much credit available for them
and interest rates are very high.
So credit is not really a great option in many situations.
And then you say, well, couldn't we
just get people to save for doing that?
And now is it the case that not having the right savings
accounts prevents people from making these purchases.
Now there's a lot of detail here,
which I think we don't need to get into too much overall.
We're going to talk About--
So there's four different treatments.
Three treatments are about preventative health investments
and there's two treatments, or one treatment more about-- two
of these, then, about emergency health treatments.
This difference is not that important for you.
What's important is one treatment
is there's a safe box.
This is, as before, that's essentially-- now
instead of having a bank account,
this is just a safe box that you have at home.
So I'm giving you a little box where you have the key.
You can keep the key, you can lock it
and put it into your house.
It's meant to be for--
so it's just storage of your money.
You can do with it whatever.
You can open it whenever you want.
It's meant to be for health expenditure.
It's sort of designed-- essentially,
it's labeled as a health savings account,
but there's nothing that stops you from using it
for other purposes.
That's essentially just a box where
you can put the money into instead
of, say, having it below your mattress or somewhere
else at home.
Second is a lock box.
This is the same as the safe box,
but now I'm keeping the key as the surveyor,
as the experimenter.
So you can put in the money, but you cannot take it out unless
you come to us at some times every once in a while.
I think after a few months, you get access to this account,
but you cannot take it out at will.
So this essentially is a commitment savings account,
very similar to the one that I just showed you.
And the money, then, also could only
be used for health expenditures.
So not only is it a commitment account,
it's also an account where essentially the expenses are
earmarked for, in this case, I guess for preventative health
investments.
You can only buy bed nets with it or the like.
Once you take out the money, I'm offering you
these different goods and you can purchase them from me.
And then there's two more.
One is sort of a health pot, which essentially is--
and this is closest to what-- it's an evaluation of a ROSCA.
People already have lots of ROSCAs.
And you can say, OK, now let's just add a health
pot to your ROSCA as well.
Whatever you're doing in your sort of ROSCA anyway,
you're going to just add a health pot and say,
is this health pot-- with your members of the ROSCA and so on,
is this health pot going to be helpful for you?
Again, the money is only supposed
to be used for health expenditure, health
investments.
Now here, there's also some social commitment and credit.
That's to say now, your ROSCA friends
and so on will bother you if you don't
put in money for the ROSCA.
And then finally, there's a health savings account where
essentially you're encouraged to make deposits
into your health savings account managed by ROSCA treasurer.
This is like one person in your ROSCA is like the accountant,
and you can only use these expenses
for acute health issues.
So if you have a health emergency, you can use it.
If you want to use the money for other stuff, you cannot.
That's a lot of detail, but that's the basic structure.
Now why would these features matter?
Let me go a little bit quicker here.
One is storage.
That's just having this box.
Outright theft is not so much of an issue.
It's not like-- and also you could just take the whole box
anyway, but it's more like protection
from temptation from yourself and from others.
So once you have it in the box, of course you can open the box
and take it out.
But once it's labeled as a health account,
and then maybe other people might
be less likely to ask you.
You might be better at saying no to them.
Maybe you might be also less likely to spend
the money on ice cream if it's in like a health lock box
anyway.
And it creates some form of what economists
would call mental account because the box is really
designed for health savings.
And there's some research that shows
once you create these mental accounts for people,
once you say this is a health savings account,
your money should be used for health savings,
people tend to follow that, even though there's no restriction
whatsoever for doing that.
People treat that as the health money
and want to spend this money on health as opposed
to on other types of things.
Second, the earmarking, essentially, some
form of commitment.
That's like a stronger commitment here now.
This is some very weak commitment in the sense
that maybe you have some internal costs,
so people will judge you in some sense.
This is a stronger commitment device.
You cannot take the money out.
Also it's therefore stronger protection from temptations
or from others.
But of course now it involves liquidity costs
and lowers your ability to respond to acute shocks.
If you-- this is what we discussed before.
If you need the money right now for other things,
you just cannot do that and people might not like that.
And then finally, there's social commitment and credit,
which is--
you can see this here in the health
part that's used in the ROSCA.
But only the ROSCA has this.
And that involves peer pressure and you
can get the health product early, again, because
of the ROSCA study as we discussed before.
This is like everybody puts in some money,
and then one person can get it first, and then the next one,
and so on.
So I get some sense, some credit get the money earlier.
So now what the paper is doing, it's
just-- you're looking at first take
up of people using these devices.
And you see after six months and after 12 months,
a large share of people are using these accounts.
They still have the lockbox, or the safe box,
but also usage is defined as having money in this account.
Is there money actually in your box right now?
And so something like between 60% and 93%,
or 97% even of people still use these accounts
six months, or 12 months later.
That seems to be a quite popular thing to do for people.
And then access to these, so giving access
to these technologies increases expenditures
in health products.
So this is now Kenyan Shillings spent on preventative health
products.
You see the safe box and the health pot
have pretty large effects.
So if I just give you a secure place in your home
to put this money that's labeled as a health investment
account or box, that increases quite a bit
your amount spent on preventative health products
later.
That's not true for the lock box.
So why might that be?
I was telling you already before, the lock box is
stronger in terms of commitment, but that's
precisely why, perhaps, people don't like it.
Because once you put in the money,
you're sort of stuck with it.
You can't use it for anything else.
So it's very inflexible and maybe it's
too strict for people.
And therefore, at least in this setting,
it seems to be that, at least on average,
the effects are smaller and not statistically significant
compared to a control group.
And then finally, the health savings account
helped deal people with shock.
So then later after 12 months, people were asked,
did you have health shocks and were you able
to deal with them?
And were you able to pay for health expenditures
and so on for illnesses during the last three months?
And you see essentially people are--
this is negatively phrased, so they're
more likely to be able to pay for these health shocks later.
So having, essentially, this health pot with a ROSCA
is helping people deal with shocks.
People are doing better in some ways,
in terms of dealing with their health overall.
This is not answering your question
exactly about are people doing better in terms of well-being.
I don't think there's happiness, or depression, or other types
of measures done.
But I think arguably, it's a good thing
if you're able to deal with health shocks in your family.
And to the fact that people keep using these accounts
even months later is encouraging.
So what are the results?
The results overall were simply providing a safe place
to keep your money increases health savings by a lot.
This, in turn, increased people's investment
in their health, including like things
like bed nets and the like.
Commitment features were actually
not helpful in this setting beyond.
So it's better to give people just
a box that's labeled as a health account in this setting
compared to an account where you can only--
not take out the money, perhaps because the commitment feature
was too strong and not helpful here.
That doesn't mean that it's not helpful in other settings,
but in this setting at least, it was not helpful.
And then why are the ROSCAs helpful?
People say essentially mostly this is about social pressure.
That seems to have been quite important.
One caveat here is that once you look at different studies,
subsequent studies in Uganda, Malawi, and Chile,
some of the same authors, or similar author teams
find less evidence of these accounts
being helpful in other settings.
We don't quite exactly know why that might be.

