PROFESSOR: Today, we're going to talk about entrepreneurship.
We're going to talk about, what is an entrepreneur?
Are the poor, in particular-- we're
going to talk about this hypothesis
that the poor are naturally born or natural entrepreneurs,
as well as just amazing at being entrepreneurs.
Everybody wants to be entrepreneurs.
And then we're going to talk about the ultra poor program,
which at its heart, is like an entrepreneurship program.
We're trying to help people be entrepreneurs,
but also tries to do a bunch of other things
in the bundled program to improve people's outcomes
or to lower poverty.
And then finally, I'm going to talk a little bit about how
to identify good entrepreneurs, or the entrepreneurs
with the highest return.
Esther has talked a little bit about this already,
but we want to talk about this in a little bit more detail.
OK, let's get started.
So there's lots of entrepreneurship
among the poor, which raises the immediate question, who or what
is an entrepreneur?
How would you define or how would you describe
what's an entrepreneur?

Yes.
STUDENT: I guess someone who runs their own business.
PROFESSOR: Somebody who runs their own business.
OK.
Any other thoughts?
Yeah.
STUDENT: They make the decisions and bear the risks
of their own business.
PROFESSOR: They make the decisions.
So this is kind of what you're saying they sort of run
the place, in some ways.
They own it, perhaps.
And you said they bear the risk.
In what ways?
STUDENT: If their business fails, they need to, like,
use their own money.
PROFESSOR: Right.
They have their own money at stake, often.
Now, of course, not always, like, all of the businesses
that own money.
But often, they have a significant stake
in the business.
And as you say, if the business fails,
if the business goes bust, you lose, essentially,
some of that money, or you have to declare
bankruptcy, et cetera.
Any other thoughts on what's an entrepreneur?
That was great, but any other ideas or thoughts?

No?
OK.
So that's what I kind of already wrote down.
You run or start a business or venture
that involves some capital investment.
So importantly, there needs to be
some capital involved or some capital investment in some way.
Some money goes into that business somehow,
be that by purchasing assets, by hiring people, or buying
products, or inputs, and so on.
And you know the entrepreneur is responsible
for a significant share of the risk of raising capital, right?
So essentially, to be able to make investments,
or to hire people, and so on, you
have to get capital or money somehow.
And the entrepreneur is essentially
raising that capital, but also has, essentially,
money on the line in case the venture does not work out.
That entrepreneur is going to lose at least some
of that money.
OK, does that make sense?
Good.
So how would you measure what fraction of people
are entrepreneurs?
I'm saying there's lots of entrepreneurship
among the poor.
How would you measure that or how would you try to find out?
Giving you some surveys or other types of information,
what would you look for?

Like, in household surveys, are there questions about are you
an entrepreneur?
Yes or no.

Yeah.
STUDENT: You can see they have their own business.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You could ask people about, do you have your own business?
That's often also not even, like, necessarily
in these household surveys.
But what else could you ask?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Are you self-employed?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So self-employment is pretty close.
Notice that that's not necessarily exactly
the same as being an entrepreneur,
you know, but it's pretty close.
And it turns out once you do that, you'll
find that the poor are disproportionately
likely to be entrepreneurs.
So when you look at OECD countries, that's mostly
like rich countries, and ask-- look at questions about
are people self-employed, about 12% of people would say yes.
Who are those people?
And, like, in the US, who are the people
that are self-employed?
Or, like, in Europe, what kind of professions do they do?

Yeah.
STUDENT: My mom was like self-employed
because she was a communications contractor.
PROFESSOR: Uh-huh, so sort of small essentially service
business, essentially?
Any other thoughts?
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: Maybe like farmers or agricultural workers
are often self-employed.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So if you have your own farm.
Now, if you're the worker, probably not,
because somebody else pays you, probably.
But if you have your own farm and so on, yes, then yes.
Angela?
STUDENT: Typically in the US, [AUDIO OUT]
those who belong to innovation hubs
or came up with their own idea have a startup.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So if you run your own startup and so on,
you also would be an entrepreneur.
That would be finance, any other products
or novel, innovative things that you're going to do.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So a consultant, you could be running your own business
or you could work for a big consulting company.
If your work for the big consulting company,
by our definition, you would not be an entrepreneur
if you work for BCG, or whatever.
But if you sort of start your own business-- or often,
consultants work for big consultancies for a while,
and then they start their own sort of business with others.
That's then often entrepreneur.
STUDENT: Freelancers are like contractors.
PROFESSOR: Freelancers, contractors, exactly.
There's often also lawyers or accountants,
they have their own sort of business by themselves.
There's also gardening businesses
or other sort of services.
But that's about 12% of people.
The fraction among the poor is much higher.
How high is it?

Any guesses?
STUDENT: 40.
PROFESSOR: Any other-- more, less?
Yeah, so 40, 50, it's probably higher than that.
So we have some questions or some survey questions
that sort help us with that.
Notice that this is for people living under a dollar a day.
So these are kind of like surveys for very poor people.
And there, you'll see lots of entrepreneurship
in agriculture.
So if you look at people who are self-employed in agriculture,
lots and lots of people have their own land, essentially.
They have their own piece of land that they own.
They have some machines.
They purchase the inputs, and so on.
And by our definition, that makes you an entrepreneur.
There are some other people who work
for other people on their land, but those are much,
much less common.
And so you hear these different countries.
You see here these are rural areas and urban areas.
This is in agriculture, so of course, you'll
see a lot more in rural areas.
And you see the fraction of people
who are sort of entrepreneur or self-employed by our definition
is very high.
It's like 50%, 60%, 70% in many places.
So, of course, there's variation across places.
But it's on the order of magnitude of 50% to 60%
on average if you take everybody.
Now then, you can look at non-agricultural work.
What kind of workers are those?
What kind of jobs are those?

So agriculture is sort of obvious.
You kind of just grow stuff on your field and farm.
What are the typical non-agricultural work
in low-income countries?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Manufacturing jobs or working [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Tailors, exactly.
Manufacturing jobs are often, you go to a firm,
and so you're employed by somebody.
Of course, you could do your own small-scale,
you make your own widgets, and so on.
Yes.
STUDENT: Like, market sellers.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, food vendors, exactly.
So this lady, for example, I think who's in Vietnam,
you would count her as an entrepreneur,
because she has her own little assets.
She buys sort of inputs.
She makes some things here, and so on,
and then sells them to others, and puts her own money, likely,
on the line, at least in part.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I'm not sure how prevalent
it is in Asian countries, but you a lot
of [INAUDIBLE] communities.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly,
like cleaning businesses, any sort
of-- a lot of, essentially, different service businesses.
Rickshaw drivers, for example, would also count.
Like essentially, you have a little--
or like you have a little bicycle or tricycle where
you transport people around.
You can have your own taxi business,
for example, and so on.
There's lots of transportation, cleaning, et cetera, right.
So barbers, carpenters, shopkeepers, food vendors,
tailors, et cetera.
Many of them are essentially single-person enterprises, so
just one person.
You have your little taxi, and you drive around.
And that would be an entrepreneurial business.
Notice that this is in contrast to what was said previously.
A lot of these businesses don't seem particularly
innovative or kind of--
a lot of things that you might associate with entrepreneurship
or sort of startups and so on in the US
would be you trying to essentially start
a business that takes over a whole area of services,
and so on.
It becomes really large and makes lots of money.
This is not the type of businesses
here, like a tailor, a shopkeeper, food vendor,
and so on tends to be very small.
They, again, return to that, OK?
Now, I can sort of count everybody.
So I'm counting.
Here, I counted non-agricultural work--
sorry, this is non-agricultural work
and this is agricultural work.
Now, of course, a lot of people have both.
But if you look at the fraction overall,
who is employed in either self-employed in any way
in agriculture and non-agricultural
work, that fraction will be even higher than the one
I just showed you previously.
It's on the order of magnitude of 70% to 80%
PROFESSOR: This is a paper by Reshmaan Hussam, Natalia Rigol,
and Ben Roth.
And SR has told you a little bit about this already,
so let me be relatively quick.
Essentially, what they were doing,
they were going to an urban area in India,
and they essentially, did a census.
They looked for all the entrepreneurs in the area
with $1,000, less than $1,000 in fixed assets.
These are tailors, rickshaw drivers, vegetable vendors,
and so on, average profits are $2.5 a day.
It's a very small businesses.
And essentially, then they ask people
before people knew that they were
going to ask about other things about their income,
their assets, profit, age, gender, et cetera,
to have characteristics that might be able to predict
rates of return.
Then they put people into groups of four
to six people based on geographic proximity
and invited them to a Central Hall
to rank one another along these above dimensions
and the marginal return to capital.
That's to say they were not asking people
a bunch of different things, including who has the highest
income, who has the most assets, who has the most
profits, but then in addition, they
asked them about what's called the marginal return to capital.
Sorry, I haven't written this out.
Essentially, it's about if I gave you
some money, by how much would your profits go up.
If I gave you $100, if you think my profits go up by $50,
so including $150, so including $100,
then my marginal return to capital would be 50%.
And so they asked people about these questions,
essentially, trying to ask people to predict
how good of an entrepreneur would you be
and how good would people make use of that money.
And then they had different treatments, individual level
treatments, but essentially, they had a $100 grant,
and some people got the $100, and other people did not.
Essentially, just randomizing across people.
Some people got money, and some people did not.
This individual level of randomization
was, essentially, used to calculate the actual returns
to capital.
You can just compare among everybody
the people who got the $100, how much did their profits go up
to people who didn't get the $100, how much did
their profits go up.
And you can do things like can look
at people who are viewed by their peers
as great entrepreneurs, which people say
this guy is going to have really high rates of return.
You can compare those people, among those people,
some people will have gotten $100,
and some people will have not gotten the $100.
So you can look at the rates of return for those people.
Among the people who were rated poorly and said,
this guy is not going to be a very good entrepreneur.
This woman will not be doing well with the money,
you also look at those people and look
at people who got the money versus not
and compare people's profits and then
calculate the rate of return among those as well.
And so then the key question is, are
people in the community able to predict
the people in the community or the people in the community
say that they have high returns.
Are those people really the ones that have
high returns, which is not?
And are people in the community doing better than maybe
what covariates are picking up anyway?
In some sense, for example, you might say,
well, women are having higher returns than men anyway,
and the community knows that.
That's not that useful because I can figure out myself
using my data that women are doing better than men.
The question is, is there unobservable
is additional information in the community that's not picked up,
that I can't figure out using the data that I have anyway
these other covariates?
And so then the second part was, you have these groups
and then they had different variation in these groups
in terms of stakes, so some people had
high stakes of prediction, others not,
meaning that they were using a subsample of people
or of predictions that they actually implemented.
That's to say I would tell Mikey you have
four or five people in your group,
and who is going to be the highest or the best
entrepreneur.
And then essentially, some of these predictions
were actually implemented, so Mikey would now
be potentially much more likely to say,
hey, I'm the best entrepreneur or my friend Gia
is the best entrepreneur, as opposed to somebody else, say
Darren or Julie, would be really good entrepreneurs,
but they're not Mikey's friends, therefore, he picks himself.
So that's what I mean by stakes in a sense of saying,
is this actual prediction implemented sometimes
versus not.
And we would think that once that information is
used to actually implement the $100 grant,
Mikey would have more incentives or people would
have more incentives to lie.
And so the money, that then gets allocated to their friends.
Seem confused.
No.
STUDENT: [? Without ?] the lack of polling with--
PROFESSOR: What was that?
STUDENT: I have so many friends [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So I think the idea is that there's always
going to be some--
you're going to people in some way.
The issue is, essentially, that you
might know who's the best person,
but then whoever is close to you,
you might want to give money to that person.
So then you name the person who's closest to you,
and that biases your estimate.
And so that's what happens when there's stakes.
Now, there's always going to be people
know each other and so on, but you
have to rank people somehow.
And the idea if there's no stakes, then
maybe you will just give a truthful ranking anyway,
because it doesn't really matter.
I'm just asking you questions, but if there are stakes,
then you might bias yourself more.

Then second, people did it in private and in public.
So this would be in private, so here nobody else in the village
will actually find out what you did except for the surveyor.
This would be in public.
Your group is around you.
So you have to tell Mikey in the face
that Gia is a better entrepreneur,
and if Mikey is my friend, I might not
want to do that because he's going to be mad at me.
And so how might private versus public matter?
Are people going to do better or worse than private or public?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Probably more honest than private.
Because in public, you have more of a reason
to skew your answers towards your friend,
because otherwise, if I do it in private I'm going to say,
Mikey, I told them you're the best, but afterwards,
but in fact, in private, I told them the truth
that Gia is a much better entrepreneur.
And then the next question they ask is, well,
couldn't you give people monetary incentives?
Could you incentivize people in some ways that
undoes these types of biases?
So if you think, really, at the end of the day,
we want to use these types of questions
and implement them in sort of field settings.
So now, we're going to have some biases,
potentially, from these types of stakes,
but now can we design certain incentives or incentive
schemes that sort of undo these types of biases,
and that's what the monetary incentives are for.
And so what do they find?
Now, here, again, you rank people on the x-axis
according to people's predicted percentile.
On the right, you see the very best.
What people think are the very best entrepreneurs
in terms of the people who have the highest rate of return.
On the left, you see the worst.
And then you see, essentially, profits
among grant losers and grant winners.

If people could not predict rates of return at all,
then the grant losers and the grant winners
should, essentially, have the same profits.

The difference between grant losers and grant winners
should be constant, but instead, what
we're seeing is that the grant winners,
the difference between the two, which, essentially,
is our treatment effect of getting a grant,
they're doing a lot better.
They have a much higher rate of return
compared to people who people predicted to not do well.
In particular, if you look here on the very left,
people who say they have a very low return,
treatment and control grant winners and grant losers
have, essentially, the same profits,
which is to say they have zero return or even
negative returns, potentially.
People on the right, people think they're going to do well,
those have very high returns.
The grant winners have much higher profits
compared to the grant losers.
And this is what they find, essentially, on average,
the rate of return is about 8% per month,
but the average return that people ranked into the highest
third is about 25% per month.
So the people where people in the community
say that are doing better, they're
doing, in fact, a lot better.
They have much higher rates of return from that.
And so this community information
remains predictive, even after controlling for observables
using machine learning, using age, gender, et cetera,
and so on.
That's to say there's unobservable information,
unobservable to me as a surveyor or the implementer
of this program, unobservable information in this community
that in some ways, I can try and elicit to figure out who are,
in fact, the best entrepreneurs.
Does this make sense?

And then the incentives matter.
I think I said that already.
Essentially, that's to say so the prediction gets
worse when reports are used for the distribution of resources.
That's essentially what we already talked about.
People favor themselves, family members and close friends,
but paying respondents for the accuracy of their reports
correct all the misreporting that stakes are produced.
And so it turns out that asking people
to reveal their reports in public
does not make them more or less truthful.
Let me then just summarize what we discussed.
So first, let me just summarize this is just
to say there's lots of information in the community,
and we can use that information from the community to, perhaps,
understand who might be good entrepreneurs
and allocate, potentially, resources to them
in terms of helping their businesses grow.
Of course, there's some fairness concerns.
You also want to provide other support to other people
potentially, but maybe you want to support certain people's
businesses, and for other people,
you just want to provide other types of benefits
in terms of consumption and so on.
So what did we learn overall?
There's lots of entrepreneurship among the poor,
but many people don't seem to want to be entrepreneurs.
They don't seem to be particularly
profitable or particularly sophisticated
businesses, and so on.
Now, at the same time, the ultra poor program
is very effective in reducing poverty persistently,
but it's very expensive.
We find that some people have much higher returns
to capital than others.
And so one open key question is now,
should we target the ultra poor program in some ways
to some people, and can we do this in a way
where then everybody else gets money
or some other types of support, and is there
a good ways of doing that?
So the key question is identifying
people who have high returns so they can be supported and then
grow their business and then hire other people,
and everybody in the community would benefit from that.
Now, at the same time, there's lots
of information in this community,
and we can elicit that information in some way.
So not only as covariates that is predictable and using
your information such as age, gender, and so on, which
is also predictive, but there's also
lots of information in the community
that we can use to do so.
And so then the hope or the goal would be--
and this is, I think, where the research overall is going
is that, in fact, it is the case that a small share of people
could be and will be great entrepreneurs that
hire lots of people and grow if given the right resources
and opportunities.
The key question is just how to identify them
and allocating resources to them in a fair way,
while not just sort of favoring certain people over others.



True or false? In theory, entrepreneurship is necessarily a zero-sum game: if an intervention increases revenue by $100 for one business, that means taking away $100 from either other businesses’ revenues or from the rest of the population (or some combination of the two).


True or false? Another possible explanation for the entrepreneurship-based poverty trap is that for most people, increasing investments in their business has diminishing returns and are stuck in the low, stable steady state; but for the few very talented entrepreneurs, increasing investments can bring them up to the high, stable steady state.

The evidence suggests that the Ultra-Poor Graduation program is extremely beneficial to some people, but for others, it doesn’t improve their lives at all (not measurably so, anyway). The program would be a lot more cost-effective if we could limit the recipients to those whom we know will benefit the most — those who will do a good job using their new goat to run a business. What is the challenge with identifying entrepreneurial talent?



Nobody has any clue who would make a good entrepreneur.

People have a good idea who would make a good entrepreneur, but this is a sensitive topic — people feel uncomfortable ranking their friends’ talents— and not something they would discuss with outsiders.

People have a good idea who would make a good entrepreneur, but there is a strong incentive to lie.

People have a good idea who would make an entrepreneur, but only about their closest friends and immediate family; it would take a lot of time and money to survey enough people to get an accurate ranking of the entire village.


PROFESSOR: Now, you might say, OK, lots of people do this.
Now, is that a natural thing, or do
we think the poor are particularly good or bad
at entrepreneurship?
What are advantages or disadvantages
of being an entrepreneur if you're poor
compared to the rich?
Yeah?
STUDENT: I think someone had mentioned it earlier,
but you're taking on much more of the risk.
PROFESSOR: Can you say more?
Exactly, take on more risk.
How so?
STUDENT: Often times it's going to be your own capital.
It's not someone else's capital that you're investing.
Here I think normally it would be a firm's capital,
and they're taking a stake in your business.
In this case, it would be you putting your own money
on the line.
So you're bearing more of the risk.
If this goes under, it's your money that's--
PROFESSOR: Right.
I think that's exactly right.
Now of course, there's also lots of rich people
who put in a lot of their money and have lots of risk involved.
But overall, I think it's true that you
have much less room for margin in the sense
that if I don't have a house, or don't have a lot of money
myself, that's worth a lot.
And I have a little bit of money and now I'm
putting this on the line with my business,
my spouse might not be working, if that business goes bust,
essentially I'll lose a lot, and my family can't eat, and so on.
So the downside is potentially much, much worse.
If I already have $5 million in my bank account
and I'm investing a million into some other business, then
even if that goes bad, I'll be just fine.
That's not to say, again, that rich people don't lose money
and so on, but the risk is much more severe in many cases.
Yeah?
Anybody else?
Mohammed?
STUDENT: Another disadvantage is you don't
have a stable source of income.
[INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: You do not have?
And so how does that matter?
STUDENT: It matters because if you
don't have a stable sense of income,
people might prefer government jobs [INAUDIBLE]..
money to spend on [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's sort of related
to what Olivia was saying.
For example, suppose I have a spouse who is employed and has
a stable source of income.
Then it's much easier for me to be an entrepreneur
because now downside risk is even if my business just
goes bust, or it doesn't work out
or whatever, we still have my spouse's regular income.
But many families have nobody who
has a regular income, or large assets,
or stuff they own that they inherited from their parents,
and therefore the downside risk is a lot higher.
Exactly right.
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: It's a lot harder for poor people to borrow or save,
so companies with large capital expenditures
are often out of the question.
PROFESSOR: And why is that?
STUDENT: Well, I mean, if you're unable--
if you need to buy equipment that would be expensive.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but why is it that if I'm very poor
and I say give me $1 million, people might not do that?
What's the issue?
STUDENT: I mean, I think for the borrowing side,
like in rich countries, you have a credit
history and a lot more data.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah.
You have credit history, you have more data.
What else do you have?
Collateral, exactly.
Often you have some collateral.
You have at least some money that you can put down yourself
and then people are going to be much more likely to give you--
if I have a dollar million and put down my own money,
people are going to be much more likely to give me
some more compared to I have nothing.
Now give me a lot of money.
People will be much more hesitant.
But you also other-- you said other things
like credit history, reputation, et cetera, and so on.
Any other thoughts?
Mm-hmm?
STUDENT: This is kind of related,
but on average, there's a higher barrier to profitability
for poor entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: What does that-- what do you mean?
STUDENT: Just it's harder for them
to turn a profit because of things
like the difficulty to borrow.
Or when they do borrow, much higher borrowing costs,
I guess.
Or if they were to be a street vendor, then
the proportion of their wealth that
has to go into holding the stand, just things like that,
I guess.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So--
STUDENT: --it's a lot of fixed costs that don't scale.
[INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly right.
Exactly.
So if you have a very small business, which
you might have because you don't have a lot of money
or a lot of capital, you're putting
in your labor costs is already pretty large fixed investment.
And if you have a very small scale,
it might be harder to make enough money to make up
for that or become profitable.
At the same time, if you have much higher interest
rates, which the poor also often have
because they don't have collateral
and don't have credit history, and so on, then--
and because the scope of the loan
is often smaller, then exactly, it's harder to be profitable.
Anybody else?

What else do you need to run a successful business?

Yeah?
STUDENT: So there are lots of advantages of spillover effects
if there is a hub of many businesses
and you tend to have that more in rich countries.
So it's easier to come up with an idea
because everyone around you comes up with an idea,
whereas in terms of mere entrepreneurship,
those benefits increased less in [INAUDIBLE] countries.
So even if there is a lot of creativity, and so
there's maybe not either the-- yeah, the environment to really
put that together [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And I think there's two things you're saying.
One is about if you have lots of other people around you
who are entrepreneurs and so on, then you
know you might exchange ideas, or you
might find people who are like-minded
and start businesses, and so on.
Now that, you would think it should
help the poor in some ways because there's lots
of other entrepreneurs around.
But there's crucially also something else,
which is you need connections to other people in some ways.
You need connections to people who have money,
you need to connections to people who are powerful,
and you need connections to people
who might be able to buy your stuff and so on who
are rich enough, and buy a lot of your things, and so on.
And the poor tend to not have that often.
So if you're grown in the US, if your parents are rich,
they are well known in a certain circles
and so on, they can introduce you
to all sorts of people who will be very, very
helpful in running a successful business,
and including, I guess, getting money.
There's one more thing that I think we didn't mention.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Is there an education piece there, too?
They have less education on average than other people?
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly.

Lack of training in terms of things
like accounting, but also in terms
of any other types of education that might be very helpful.
You can't just get an MBA if you're poor,
or if you wanted to run a business,
or any other types of college or other education.
That's exactly right.

Now what are some advantages?
We mentioned some disadvantages.
Now what about advantages?
What might be counter-arguments for this?

Yeah?
STUDENT: There might be more business opportunities
within poor communities that like rich businesses
haven't exploited.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
There's this type of idea of businesses
at the bottom of the pyramid people call it sometimes,
which, essentially, is like, you have a lot of information
about unmet needs or demands that people might
have that if you grown up rich, you might not even dream about.
You don't even know what these things are that people need.
And you might think there's lots and lots
of poor people in many places that have unmet needs
or demands that you might be able to understand much better.
And you might be able to meet them in some way
by coming up with new products, or things, services for them.
Yeah?
STUDENT: And related to that, there's
this idea of decreasing marginal returns.
So if you're right at the start, not only is it easier to supply
stuff because there's less around,
but it's also easier to come up with something
original in a sense because there's nothing around.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So exactly.
In some ways, small scale could be good in the sense
that you don't need to actually sell to millions of people.
You need to just find a few people that you can sell to
and that might be enough for you to make profits.
And then the larger your business becomes, often there's
decreasing returns, or at least in some cases,
and then that's harder to make profits then.
Lucas?
STUDENT: You might be able to benefit from being
able to be more flexible.
So like if you're operating a store
and some inventory is out, it's very easy to pivot
towards what people want to buy because you're often buying
in very small quantities.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
There's a little bit more flexibility
and that's kind of what I mean here
in the second bullet point.
The smaller scale operation gives you some benefits
as well in the sense that you attract less scrutiny.
For example, suppose you do something that pollutes
the environment in some way.
If you do this at a huge scale, people will be onto you
and you get in trouble very easily.
Suppose you do this in a very small scale,
probably nobody will bother to go after you in some way.
But you're selling other things.
There's more flexibility.
It's easier to pivot because you don't
have-- you haven't made huge investments in certain things.
So it's easier to say, perhaps we're doing something
different, or , pivoting and so on.
So then there's-- and then at the same time, there's also,
in a way, fewer outside options.
That's not necessarily a reason why
you'd be more successful, but perhaps
why it's more attractive for people to be an entrepreneur.
If you can't get another good job that pays you well anyway,
then you might want to be an entrepreneur because you're
going to make that money at least
and then you're your own boss in some ways.
So then that, of course, then raises the question, well,
why are so many of the poor entrepreneurs if it's
quite difficult for them?
So this is-- you might have seen or heard
at least from Muhammad Yunus in Esther's lecture on credit,
or microcredit.
This is the person who won the Nobel Prize for the Grameen
Bank as being the banker, as he called,
as the banker of the poor for essentially offering
microcredits to millions and millions of people and arguing,
essentially, that the poor are natural entrepreneurs.
What is sort of the implication, or what is the argument here?
So we just said, there's lots of reasons
why it's hard to be an entrepreneur if you're poor,
not so lots of reasons that you want to be.
There's lots of reasons not to be an entrepreneur.
Now why are people entrepreneurs anyway?
What is this argument here?
Yeah?
STUDENT: There's a smaller job market outside
of entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: So that's one, but that's not-- that's correct,
but that's not necessarily Yunus--
so let's say they don't have a lot of other options.
We can return to that.
That's exactly right.
But that's not quite Yunus' argument.
What is Yunus' argument?

Yeah, in the back?
Yeah.
STUDENT: It was kind of the idea that the poor don't always
have as much available to them, so they're
able to make more of what they have and they're
used to doing that.
So the idea of being natural entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I think the argument is essentially
that people are very savvy in one way or the other.
And here's one quote.
I was looking at some of Yunus' quote.
And one of them says, "In my experience,
poor people are the world's greatest entrepreneurs.
Every day they must innovate in order to survive.
They remain poor because they do not
have the opportunities to turn their creativity
into sustainable income."
That's essentially saying two things.
One is that they're very savvy and very talented,
and many of them, pretty much everybody,
and this is another quote of his, is saying,
we are all natural entrepreneurs.
Everybody can be an entrepreneur.
And the difference between the rich and the poor
is just that the poor don't have money.
So then the second argument is, well,
if we just gave people access to credit, if we just gave people
money, then everybody would run their business,
and make more money, and become--
grow, essentially, out of poverty.
Now you already learned from Esther
during the credit lecture that that's not necessarily
the case in the sense that once people have access
to microcredit, few people start businesses,
few people do well in those businesses,
and overall, it's not necessarily
a poverty-alleviating intervention.
We're going to return to that as well.
But that's the argument.
So let's try to entertain this argument for a bit
and let's try to see can we find evidence,
or what can we learn about the poor
being natural entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: Now what do we actually
know about the businesses of the poor
in these types of dimensions?
Talked about it already a little bit,
but what do we know about them?
You can pick whatever you want to talk about.

Yeah?
STUDENT: It's the size that was spoken about a lot.
They're very small, and it's not really scalable.
PROFESSOR: They're very small.
It's often not scalable.
It's often like-- how small is small?
How many people?
STUDENT: I think some of them were--
most of them were 1 in 40.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, either it's essentially just single person
is I run my own taxi shop.
That's just me.
Or often, it's one or two people involved.
Businesses are essentially tiny, both
in terms of employees-- and what way are they also small?
So it's like labor inputs, but also--
STUDENT: Market cap as well as the number
of people that they serve.
PROFESSOR: Right, the number of people they serve is small.
What else?

Yeah?
STUDENT: I think there are a lot of people
that have similar businesses in close proximity.
[INAUDIBLE] you were talking about,
they don't really come together and make a bigger business.
They stay separate.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I don't have that in here, actually, I think,
but you're exactly right.
Not only are they very small businesses,
there's also lots of them in the same area.
So they're, in some ways, also not particularly innovative
businesses in some ways.
If there's 20 people doing exactly the same thing,
if you're number 21 and start your businesses,
that's not a particularly innovative or new idea.
It's just do it for us for other reasons.
And that, of course, in turn, limits growth in some ways.
If there's already 20 people doing the exact same thing
as I'm doing, unless we merge in some way, which people don't
seem to be doing very much, then you
get businesses are going to be small.
That's right.
But in in terms of-- in addition to [INAUDIBLE] labor
input, what other inputs or what other things are small?
So demand or the market size is small.
What else?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] offer a product,
like you have little shops in which [INAUDIBLE] diversity
and so, obviously, people buy less
and because they may be just shelves empty [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right, and why is so little offered?
What's the reason?
If you run a little shop, why don't you
just offer everything?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]---- well, first of all, it might be,
perhaps, expensive to buy a product [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
You don't have a lot of capital, so then you're
just going to sell one or two things.
For example, I spent a lot of time in Chennai
while working on some research, and there,
every morning, I really like eating bananas, especially
small bananas.
And there was a guy who ran a shop who had,
I think, bananas, newspapers, and cigarettes he was selling,
and that's what he was doing.
And he seemed to be doing fine, but there
was nothing else offered.
And the reason, probably, was that, A, his store was
extremely small, and, B--
so you couldn't even store that much more.
Of course, you could have expanded.
But B, buying more things is expensive,
and you need capital to do that.
STUDENT: In a way, it could also because people around you
in your neighborhood just know that you're
the guy selling that?
Well, perhaps, there's loads of people around who do the same,
but they rely on [INAUDIBLE] reliability [INAUDIBLE]
you'll always have bananas?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I guess some specialization is helpful.
And otherwise, you'd have to hire probably
more people and so on.
And so, in some sense, it's easier
to specialize on one or two things compared to a lot.
The other thing I think that--
so let me sort of back up for a second and get back to this.
So one is the total number of employees is very small.
This is the total number of employees overall,
including unpaid employees.
So this would be if your uncle or your child or your spouse
also works with you.
The average number of employees, overall, is about one.
That's on average.
The number of paid employees is even much lower.
So a lot of these employees are essentially
unpaid family members.
When you just look at the paid ones
that number is about 0.15 on average.
Now, of course, this is selected on people
living under $1 a day, but many of them [INAUDIBLE]
have these businesses, and they don't really hire anybody else.
They just run it on their own or they have a family business
overall.
So then, this is sort of the other part
that's small in terms of businesses--
essentially, machines.
Only about half of these businesses
own any type of machine--
and just so you know, of course, ranges and so on.
And what does that imply for the businesses, how they run?
Well, that means essentially the businesses are often not
particularly sophisticated in terms
of making complicated things or building
products that are very hard to do with many different steps.
If you have zero machines, that limits greatly what
you can actually do.
So often, there are few specialized skills required.
Anybody, essentially, can work in a shop in some ways,
as long as you know some math.
And often, as we already said, the businesses
are not particularly innovative or creative.
In some ways, they're doing very simple things
that everybody else in the neighborhood
is also doing in some way or similarly.
Julie had a question.
STUDENT: So [INAUDIBLE] have this idea
that, with opportunities, all the poor could start businesses
and start doing better.
So I guess I'm wondering who's doing worse?
Is it zero-sum?
Are customers doing worse or something, but then
they wouldn't buy if they're doing worse--
PROFESSOR: Doing worse because of what?
STUDENT: Like, where is money coming from?
PROFESSOR: Say that again.
STUDENT: So if, in his idea, all the entrepreneurs are doing
better, who's doing worse?
PROFESSOR: So I think the idea is it's not zero-sum,
and the idea being, essentially, you
give money-- so suppose you give money to a person
and help them be an entrepreneur, like buying
machines or the like.
That entrepreneur is going to offer new products,
buy new machines, hire other people.
Then people purchase their products.
The other people who are hired, essentially, also purchasing.
So there's, essentially, a multiplier.
Everybody, at the end of the day, spillovers to other people
because, essentially, the entrepreneur
is going to be hiring people, creating new products,
consumers are better off because they like the new products,
and so on.
But I think the counterfactual is mostly about--
he was essentially saying we shouldn't do charity.
We shouldn't just give people money.
And actually, our case on Monday will be exactly about that.
It's like, should you do GiveDirectly,
our old friend that we already know from previous cases?
Should you just give people cash?
Or should you try to be more involved things that
help people doing at least some form of businesses?
And he's essentially saying charity is bad.
You shouldn't just give people money.
Instead, help them be entrepreneur, the reason
being that, A, this has sustained effects
on people over time.
So once you have a business you can grow
and then, at some point, you will not
need any charity anymore.
And second, it benefits other people
because once I have a big business,
I'm going to hire lots of people.
I'm going to pay them well, and they're
going to purchase other things.
And that helps other entrepreneurs, and so on.
That's kind of the fiscal or other type of multiplier people
call that.
PROFESSOR: We talked about, now, size.
Now, what types of-- or we talked a little bit about types
as well.
What about all these other ones-- multiplicity
and durability aspirations.
What else do we know?

How many businesses do people have?

Yes?
STUDENT: A lot of times people will
have more than one business if they're not
putting all their resources into growing that one
sector of the business.
PROFESSOR: So they have not one business, but two or three.
So here is the fraction of households that receive income
from multiple sectors.
You see that fraction is often very high.
Lots of people in rural areas have two sectors,
which is essentially agriculture and nonagricultural sectors.
So they run some agriculture business,
and then they also have some other shop or stuff like that.
But also, even in urban areas, you
see people do multiple things.
Now, why might you do that?
Why might you just say, OK, I'm choosing whatever
is my best business, my most profitable in business
and invest everything I can into that business
and try to grow it?
What are reasons not to do that?
Why might you do three things instead?

STUDENT: You're not very susceptible to shocks there.
So if your business fails, [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: So that's essentially a diversification issue,
which is to say once you have three businesses--
one goes under--
then at least you have two others left
that give you some income source.
That's essentially like, similarly,
if you invest in finance into a portfolio,
you want to diversify your portfolio.
Investing in different things helps you diversify.
That's exactly right.
Any other argument?

Yes, Lucas.
STUDENT: Also, businesses might have
diminishing returns at a time.
Like, for example, if you have the shopkeeper,
like, yes, if they were able to buy more inventory,
they could sell more.
But they don't have the capital for that,
so there's not really any sense of them
keeping the shop open because they don't have anything
to sell.
So they have to spend their time doing something else.
PROFESSOR: Exactly right, so we'll
talk about this in a second or a little bit later as well.
But essentially, for each type of businesses
that people at least are in currently,
that have a certain production function,
and that production function is essentially very concave,
which is to say there's very quickly diminishing returns.
So suppose I'm selling bananas in my neighborhood.
There's only so many bananas I can
sell in part because there's lots of other banana
sellers in my neighborhood.
So I can only sell to the 20 people around me.
And so I don't want to only sell bananas because then otherwise,
I would just be very hard for me to find other customers.

Yes, Astrid.
STUDENT: Maybe they have more free time because,
for example, if you're stubborn, and maybe you just sell
in the morning, and no one will buy in the afternoon,
so you have nothing to do in the afternoon.
So you want to find other stuff to do.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
So there are certain businesses that are essentially
time specific, where you sell to people
in the morning-- some breakfast.
You make tea for people where people in certain times
only demand your product or coffee shops,
for example, which are also true for some transportation where,
sometimes, there's rush hour-- your relative customers--
but then, at other times, not very much.
Now that's also true for agriculture and rural areas.
Often, there's essentially the planting season,
and there's harvest, and so on.
But then other than those seasons,
often, there's not that much to do.
And what people call the lean season, in particular,
you're essentially just waiting for your crops
to grow until harvest comes or until you can harvest.
And so there's just not that much other stuff to do.
And so then you might as well try
what many people do in India, for example-- in rural India--
try to do some casual labor work for somebody else.
But you might also try to have your own businesses
and have a little shop or other types of things
where you sell stuff.
Any other reasons?

Maybe talk about this-- mostly seasonal businesses diversify
your portfolio, a lack of capital, as well, in the sense
that you would just need to invest to make
a really large business.
And you might say if you have two people,
you might have a little shop, and so
you use, essentially, your labor for each of these businesses--
husbands and wife or spouses or people in the family.
But there's not a lot of capital,
so you would need a lot of money to have
one big business to do that.
But two small ones might be easier, to do.
Now, notice that, also, that implies some limited benefits
from specialization.
We talked about specialization a little bit in a sense
that you might have a few products
or things within your shop or whatever you're doing.
But there's also specialization from only
doing one thing as opposed to doing three or four
different jobs.
And so it's much easier to do one thing very well
than doing three things or four things at a time.

So we talked about multiplicity, and what
about durability and aspirations?
How long are these businesses lasting?

So check on who has done the readings.

Yes.
STUDENT: He said a lot of them last under five years, which
goes back to multiplicity because stuff
is like [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so if you don't have a big stake in something--
if you do a little thing where you sell some stuff;
you don't have invested a lot--
and then you have five different businesses or three,
and one of them doesn't work out, that's fine.
And so here's-- let me show you this--
a survey that was done also with people under $1 a day
and about--
this was in 2002, quite a while ago.
But I think the insights are still right.
About 15% of those living under $1 a day
reported running a business.
I think this is an urban area.
15% have a business in 2002.
Then people were surveyed again in 2005,
and 6% still say they have the same business.
That's to say 60% of the businesses of the 15%,
essentially, are out of business-- not there anymore.
And then 1.8% say, I still have the original workforce
until 2005.
So essentially, there's a lot of turnover.
People start businesses.
People stop businesses.
Businesses don't work out, and so on.
Of course, that also implies that businesses
are often small.
If your business is only a year old,
it's very hard to have a large business.
Usually, it takes quite a while until businesses grow.
But the typical business, essentially,
doesn't last very long.
Now, finally, aspirations-- do people
want to be entrepreneurs?
When you ask them, or how would you know?
What would be a good idea to ask them,
or how can you figure out?
Yes, Julie.
STUDENT: In the reading example, they
said that the parents wanted their children
to work for the government and have or be a teacher
or have a stable job.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, and so why do we ask about the children
and not about the people themselves?
Why not just ask, do you want to be an entrepreneur,
or would you rather do something else?
STUDENT: Maybe, the catch is your personal accounts.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I think it's much harder
to say-- if you ask me, would you
rather be a professor or something else, if I say,
I'd rather or should have done something different,
I say I kind of screwed up.
I should have done something different,
or maybe, I am just, right now, not
competent to do anything else, which is probably true.
So in some sense, it's a little bit
of a weird question if you ask me now,
what would you like to do, if I'd rather
be a physicist, it's like I'm entirely incompetent to be
a physicist, so then, therefore, I probably
will not be a physicist.
But that doesn't mean that I might not want to do that,
but acknowledging that, it would say I
made wrong choices in the past and so on.
So people are probably more likely to say,
I like the thing I do.
But once you ask about children, it's
much more about, what is it, really,
ideally, that we want them to do?
Now you said exactly right.
People essentially say that--
let me show you this here--

people say they want to be private firm
employees or, essentially, wage workers, government teachers,
or non-teaching government jobs.
Essentially, people want to not run their own business.
They want to work for the government.
They want a stable income either through some firm or, even
better, the government.
There's another question that asks the same questions about--
in case of a lottery win--
that's essentially a similar reason to what I just told you
about, which is to say, well, maybe people say,
oh we can't really do anything else.
My kid needs to work in the business
because we need that to survive.
When you ask people about, well, if you one box
the lottery, what would you like,
people gave very similar answers,
so it's not so much about constraints and so on.
So that seems, essentially, to say
people don't seem to be super committed to their businesses
overall.
They don't seem to be super excited about their business
in the sense that they abandoned a business quite often.
They start and invent new ones and so on.
They also seem to be don't seem to be investing particularly
much in their businesses.
Now, one thing I want to be very clear about--
and I want to be very precise about this--
is that doesn't mean that there's not
a lot of incredibly talented and dynamic entrepreneurs
among the poor.
It might well be that there's 5% of people who are really,
really good entrepreneurs and maybe 1% of people
who are really good entrepreneurs
and they should be entrepreneurs.
What I'm commenting on is the claim
that, essentially, everybody should be an entrepreneur.
And if you think about yourself or your class
or your classmates and friends, maybe 1%, maybe 5%,
maybe 10% of people should try to be an entrepreneur.
But being an entrepreneur is incredibly hard,
and only a small fraction of people
will decide to be an entrepreneur,
and only a small fraction of those
will actually be successful.
And what I'm saying here is that for the rich
and for the poor, that's pretty similar.
And the claim that the poor are natural entrepreneurs
or particularly good or just extremely savvy by being poor--
just learn how to be an entrepreneur--
does not seem to be true in the data.
Again, that doesn't mean that there's not
a fraction of people who could be amazing entrepreneurs
and that whom we should support and to grow
their businesses and so on.
But the idea that everybody should be an entrepreneur
doesn't seem to be quite right.
So then let me summarize what we just said.
We say, what do we know about businesses among the poor?
Most businesses of the poor are very small--
few, very few machines, other forms of capital.
Many people run several businesses in part
due to diversification.
There's high turnover.
Many businesses fail or close for other reasons,
and people don't seem to have great aspirations in terms
of wanting to be an entrepreneur.
PROFESSOR: So then next--
we talked about this a little bit already.
Are these businesses profitable?
How would you measure profits?

How would you find out?
Or what's tricky about measuring profits?

Yeah.
STUDENT: Opportunity costs.
PROFESSOR: Say more.
Opportunity costs, what are those?
STUDENT: Like, when you're making stuff
for rich countries for more money,
the [INAUDIBLE] best of the day if possible could have
done something better with it.
It's one of the ways to measure profitability
so that you-- part of the nature work on some
of those-- interest rates are really high.
So it's impossible to use interest rates to do this.
So you'd have to find other ways to measure profitability.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So you're saying the bar, essentially,
is very high because interest rates are high.
And you want to compare an investment of, say,
$100 or $1,000 or $1 million, you want to say,
what returns should you get if you invested in, say, the stock
market.
Or, what is the return that you have to pay?
And you're saying that the interest is higher,
and therefore, it might not be profitable or--
STUDENT: Like, comparatively.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So interest rates are high, that's exactly right.
But now, how would you measure whether it's profitable
overall?
How do we measure profits?
Yes, Julie.
STUDENT: So should you subtract like--
if you have a wage.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And so what's tricky about that?

STUDENT: They might not be able to get a government job
or something with a comparable wage.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So if I run my banana shop, you asked me, what are my profits?
I'm going to tell you, here is my revenues--
how much have I sold?
Here are my costs--
how much did I pay for inputs?
Maybe I paid some employees.
Maybe I have some rent to pay for my little shop,
or maybe I own it myself.
But the crucial part, essentially,
is labor costs and how do I account for that.
I spent all day in my shop, and I'm
saying I'm working eight hours a day or 10 hours a day
or whatever.
Now, the question is, how do we value that, right?
And so that's different from, like,
in rich countries, where if you look at any other company--
because there, people are just paid their salary.
Everybody is paid their salary-- maybe sometimes not the owner.
But the vast share of people essentially
is paid some salary, so we can just
look at the wage bill and measure
how much are people paid.
So then the profits are essentially
revenues minus costs, which include
capital costs and labor costs and any other costs that
are there.
But here, labor costs, the vast share of labor costs
are essentially unpaid in some ways.
And so then that makes it much trickier.
So how would you go about this?
If I told you I'm working 10 hours--
I don't have a job otherwise.
I'm just working in my business.
How would you go about trying to measure my labor costs?

Yes, Moni.
STUDENT: Get sort of a minimum cost for everyone.
And if that person spends their own time, then--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
You have to do something-- you have to find some measure.
People have tried to do different assumption.
One assumption is to say just use the minimum wage.
And just say that's like, in some sense,
a lower bound how much you should be paid
is the minimum wage.
Another version of that would be just the going-market wage,
is to say, how much is a typical person with your qualification
paid who's working in the labor market?
All of these are imperfect because there's often
selection involved.
There's a reason why I'm working in my banana business
as opposed to in the labor market, being paid.
That could be because I'm more qualified or less qualified,
or more productive, less productive, motivated,
and so on.
But it's a pretty good approximation.
So once you do that, once you measure household labor priced
at a minimum wage, most businesses essentially
lose money.
Now, I think Kyle was saying already
is, like, well, on the other hand,
they pay high interest rates, so the marginal returns must
be high.
What do I mean by this?
I mean by this, people take loans.
Many businesses take loans.
Interest rates are very high, and these loans
are often paid back.
That must essentially mean that if I'm taking $100 loan
and I'm paying a 20% interest rate,
that must mean that the rate of return on that investment
is at least 20%.
Because otherwise, I would eventually not
be able to pay back or would not take that loan anymore
in the future.
So essentially, rates of return are
high when people invest in their business.
They make actually quite a bit of money
because that allows them to pay back their loans.
Now, how are these things consistent?
So on the one end, I'm saying the marginal return
to capital is high.
On the other hand, I'm saying that these businesses
lose a lot of money.
How do these things fit together?
I'll you think about this for a second.

Yes.
STUDENT: Marginal return might be high, but total return low.
So it doesn't really--
the two things can coexist.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So the marginal return might be high,
but the average return-- or essentially, there's
lots of fixed costs involved.
So, for example, if I work myself in this business,
my labor cost's actually pretty high
because I could work somewhere else
and make some money at least.
And now I invest a little bit.
I make a very high return investing, right?
Because the first investment, the marginal return
is very high.
But if I invested a lot more, perhaps returns
would be going down.
Or essentially, the small scale--
this is, I think, what Zion was saying earlier--
the scale is too small to make up for the labor or the fixed
costs that I might have.
OK?
So the small scale doesn't make it profitable.
Now then the next question, of course,
is, well, why are we still stuck at this small scale?
So why are people not investing more in growing their business?

Yes.
STUDENT: I know one thing talked about in the reading was
a lot of these businesses-- we were saying earlier-- only
have one employee now.
But as you grow your business, you also
have to start paying more employees.
That's additional cost.
And it's just hard to manage running a bigger business
if you only run such a small business before.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So one issue is--
the reason you might say why people have so many family
businesses and so on is because supervising other people
is hard.
There's often not a lot of enforcement in courts.
And there's not a lot of trust, in some ways,
perhaps because of that.
So then if you wanted to hire seven other people,
it would be hard to monitor them and make sure that they're
doing what they're doing.
And so, therefore, people just say it's not
worth doing that expanding.
That's one broad argument.
And that's why people often have family labor
because they trust their family more,
and that's sort of more reliable, potentially.
Of course, you might also have your incompetent uncle
in your small firm whom you'd rather not have,
but you have to do that because of family pressures.
That's one reason.
Any other reasons?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Because there's sort of, I think,
a threshold you reach, where if you've made more investment--
for example, in fixed costs or whatever--
the marginal return would be extremely high.
But then it's risky.
And then you have three of those on your hands,
so which one you pick?
So you don't really know.
So you'd rather keep them, all three at the threshold,
where you still make money with them
but it doesn't get too expensive,
and it's not too risky.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Essentially, that's our old friend, the poverty trap,
if you remember.
And this is, in some sense, some form
of a poverty trap argument, which
is to say there's essentially two technologies or two
different production functions or things
that you can invest in.
One is-- this is sort of the curve p here that you see,
where, essentially, returns are very high initially,
and then they flatten off very quickly.
And it gets very, very flat.
So once you invest more and more,
essentially, it's not worth doing.
It gets very flat.
And then there's a different technology,
which is the one here that starts at q,
that starts much further out.
So think of this as, like, a much more complicated
technology.
You need big machines.
You need lots of money and so on.
If you could invest in that technology,
you would need a lot of money.
And it's only worth investing in this technology
if you have a lot of money or using that technology
if you have a lot of money.
You buy a big machine.
And if you invest a lot of capital,
then you're going to make a lot of money
and become potentially quite rich.
If you use technology one, you're
going to be stuck at point m.
You're not going to go anywhere.
Notice then you need a bunch of money
to be able to use the second technology.
You need a lot of investment in capital.
And then you want to end up here at this point up there.
OK?
And so that's essentially to say that the reason that people
are not investing is because they're
sort of in this technology.
Now, if they had a huge amount of money,
they could switch technology, do something
more complicated and so on.
Often, perhaps, that also requires a lot more skill,
and that's more complicated.
And you have manage people, you have complicated
production processes and so on.
So if you could use this other technology,
that'd be really helpful and profitable.
But many people are not able to do that for reasons--
A, they don't have the capital.
And, B, perhaps it's also a complicated thing
to do that requires a lot of skill
and you need to be a very savvy investor or entrepreneur.
And so there's actually some evidence for, at least,
the limited scope for growth in this technology
here, the technology 1.
There's a very nice paper by [INAUDIBLE] et. al.
that look at what people call cash drops for entrepreneurs,
where essentially, they just drop money on entrepreneurs
and say, here's $250 or here's $500.
Do with it whatever you want to do.
You can invest in your business.
You can do whatever you want with it.
And then they track people's profits afterwards.
And what they find, they find very high returns.
They find something like 60% return
on average on the first $250 compared to a control group
who doesn't get this money.
But then if you look at-- there's
another group who received $500.
And among those who received $500,
many people only invest 250, or about half of this,
and then just don't invest the rest-- presumably
because maybe there's high returns at the margin.
Like here, there's high returns here,
but then it flattens out very quickly.
So then people don't bother to invest further
in their business.
And then perhaps $250 are not enough to go on this train here
to technology number 2.
Does this make sense to people?
This is also explained in detail in the book if you remember.

PROFESSOR: So then let me summarize so far.
And then we'll take a quick break.
So many of the poor entrepreneurs,
these businesses are often pretty simple and not very
successful.
And that leads to a lack of good jobs.
Why is there a lack of good jobs?
Well, if everybody runs their businesses on their own
and doesn't hire anybody else, well, nobody gets hired.
Now, of course, then, because there's no good jobs
available-- people would like these good jobs.
But these good jobs are not available.
Now you have to run your own business
because you'd rather work at a factory or the government,
and so on.
You'd rather be hired for a fixed wage by somebody else.
But these good jobs are not available.
And therefore you have to run your own business.
So therefore nobody creates jobs,
and therefore everybody runs their own business.
And that's sort of a cycle that keeps on going.
Second, many of the businesses are not profitable.
So that seems to sort of say people are not
natural entrepreneurs, or at least many of them are not.
This is also then consistent, as I said already,
as Esther told you about, the lack
of transformative effects of microfinance for most people.
Now, remember what Esther also said in her lecture,
is that we know that for most people,
essentially, microfinance does not reduce poverty,
or people are not increasing any profits.
But she mentioned, at least briefly,
that there is in fact evidence, or some evidence at least,
of large impact of microfinance on some people who
are, they call them, gung-ho entrepreneurs,
who are existing entrepreneurs.
Something like maybe 5% or 10% of people,
once you give them credit, they actually make a lot of money.
They grow their business.
They become richer, and perhaps escape a poverty trap.
That's to say, there is in fact a fraction
of people who are highly talented entrepreneurs who
would benefit a lot.
So in some sense, if you take this curve here--
that's to say most people are essentially on this curve here.
They either don't have enough cash
or are just not savvy enough in some ways
to go on this other curve.
So once you give them a bunch of access to microcredit,
et cetera, and so on, you're not going
to find big effects because essentially they're
sort of stuck on this curve down here.
They might move it a little bit to the right.
They'll make some money.
And then essentially, eventually, they'll
converge back to this point A. But maybe there are 5% or 10%
of people who have access to technology
too, perhaps because they're very savvy
or perhaps they already have quite a bit of money
to start with.
Maybe they can get more money from other people, and so on.
They actually make it to this curve here.
They become richer.
They start hiring people.
They start growing their business, and so on.
And a key question in this literature
is how to identify and support people
who have sustained high returns to capital,
so not just one investment makes high returns,
but over time, they grow their businesses
and have higher profits overall, and will then
grow their businesses and hire other people.
That's really the key question to try and figure out.
A related finding that we're not going to talk about very much
is there's a bunch of people who have
tried different things in terms of training entrepreneurs.
Would be like, can we help you do bookkeeping?
And can we do all sorts of how you should do inventory
and how do you separate your business
from your private expenses, and so on?
And by and large, some of these are sort of
moderately effective.
But by and large, it's not a super successful endeavor.
And I think that's consistent with the idea
that there's a small share of people who are really talented
and should be entrepreneurs.
And maybe they would also actually
benefit from the training more.
Or maybe they're already good at what it is.
But most people either don't want to be entrepreneurs,
they're not good at being entrepreneurs.
And training doesn't really change that very much.
So that then suggests, perhaps instead, we
should try to identify people who are very good at this
and then try to support those because then they
become successful entrepreneurs and potentially hire
a bunch of people.
And again, I want to be very clear.
This is not about saying, like, the poor are bad entrepreneurs
and they don't know what they're doing.
This is saying essentially, just like the rich,
the poor have good and bad entrepreneurs.
And many people, including myself,
are not good entrepreneurs.
I would be terrible at being an entrepreneur.
And therefore, the last thing I'm going to do
is start a business.
And that's fine.
We want to identify people who have high returns who
can grow their business and want to give capital
to those people, because they will be able to grow
their business, have sustained high returns,
and then hire other people.
And these other people then would
be very happy to be hired at a fixed wage.
They'd much rather have a good job
in another business than running their own business as they
don't seem to like that much.
And that's not particularly successful.

Unless you have questions, we're going to take a quick break.
And then, next, we're going to ask
a slightly different question, which is to say,
can we support small-scale entrepreneurship
and other help to reduce extreme poverty?
That's sort of saying like, regardless
of whether people become super rich over time,
is it a good idea--
when you have an anti-poverty program,
is a good idea to provide people with some assets
and help them run some small businesses on their own?
Can you teach people to do that, not necessarily
because they're going to have huge businesses that
help others but because it helps them reduce
extreme poverty over time?
We're going to do that after.
That's what people have referred to often
as the ultra-poor program.
PROFESSOR: So we're back.
A key policy question, as we identified,
is how to identify and support people who
have high returns to capital.
And we're going to go next.
Let's talk a little bit about whether we can first--
whether we think supporting small scale entrepreneurship,
plus some other help is reducing extreme poverty,
and then we're going to return to the targeting question
and say, even if that's true, is it
the case that we can identify there's
a certain group of people who benefits the most?
And would it make sense to, perhaps, focus on those?
OK?
So there's a very successful program
that I'm going to tell you a little bit about now,
which is called the ultra poor program graduation approach.
And it's very much like a pretty comprehensive program
that does a lot of things.
It has key ingredients.
Beneficiaries are often identified by the community.
So essentially you try to find people
who are what people often refer to as ultra poor.
So people who are really, really poor.
They're too poor, for example, to qualify for microfinance
in many situations.
OK.
So these are essentially people who have next to zero.
People have received an asset transfer.
Often you see here a goat, sometimes a chicken,
sometimes other types of animals.
So you get an asset that's often quite
a bit of money, something like $250 purchasing power parity.
They also get some income support for a few weeks.
So they get-- in addition to receiving the asset,
they also get some money to just be
able to focus, perhaps, on the new asset on their business.
They get some technical support, including
some hand-holding and other support that,
for example, would explain how to take care of the asset
and support people, and other questions that they might have.
There's often some component on group meetings, coaching,
health, and so on that's often relatively minor
but it also exists.
And then there's also access to a savings account,
as we talked about before, but essentially
gives people some way to save money
if they would like to do so.
OK?
So it's a pretty comprehensive program.
If that program works, it's a little bit hard
to understand exactly why it works,
and the current literature, in part,
is trying to figure this out.
But it does a lot of different things,
and the idea is that once you do lots of different things
at the same time, then perhaps that's
more helpful than doing each of these things on their own.
Or just more broadly, once you do them,
that's just an effective way to help people.
That's to say, rather than doing one thing at a time,
why not do all of those things?
And perhaps then once I'm taking care of your ability
to save your health or just your cash needs in the short run,
maybe that's better for you because now you
can focus on your goat or the asset that you have.
But otherwise if you have so many other things going on
in your life that you have to worry about and have
to deal with, perhaps that that'll
make you worse at dealing with your asset or goat.
Notice that this is very expensive overall.
So not only is the asset quite expensive.
In addition, it's not cash.
So in GiveDirectly, remember, when you give directly right
now, if you told your family over Thanksgiving
or over the winter break that if they wanted to give money
to the poor, say, in Kenya, you can tell them,
look, if you give $100, I think something like 90%,
roughly, will end up at a poor person's phone
that they can use on their own directly with very little
overhead.
This is not this.
This is a lot more overhead because you
have to do all sorts of things in terms of figuring out
which assets are right.
You have to get a bunch of goats.
You know you get the goats to people.
You have to make sure that the goats are surviving, and so on.
This is a much more complicated and involved thing
that makes it also much more expensive.
Again, on Monday you're going to try in the case
to try to compare GiveDirectly versus this ultra poor program
and try to think about why is one or the other
perhaps better.
But overall, I think one clear issue here
is that it's very expensive.
Now it's also a package, and so-- but the idea here
is that then if this is effective,
the reason why this might be a good idea to do
is if you can increase people's earnings sustainably over time.
So it's not just say, like, next year you're
going to have higher income, or in two years
you're going to have higher income.
The idea is if you get your income
to increase for 10, 20 years through this program by, say,
something like $100 each year or a little bit more,
then it's going to be worth doing that because it's
going to be worth those costs.
But the idea is very much like if there's no long run
effects of this type of thing, this is not a good idea
because then you might as well just give people cash
because doing all these other activities is very expensive.
Does that make sense to everybody?
OK.
So now it turns out there's quite a few very impressive
studies that people have done over the past few years.
There's one paper which is Bandiera et al doing
an RCT of the [INAUDIBLE] NGO that
works in many places now, but in particular
at the time in Bangladesh.
So that's an RCT of an ultra poor program in Bangladesh
that follows up with people after two years
and after four years.
So that's already quite long.
But that's specifically one type of intervention in Bangladesh.
You might say, well, does this work just in other places
as well?
If it works in Bangladesh, how do I
know that it wasn't just specific to Bangladesh
and that the program works well?
It's just sort of a generalizable finding.
And so then there's a paper by Abhijit Banerjee Esther
Duflo and a bunch of other coauthors
that do a quite similar intervention in six
countries, Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India,
Pakistan, and Peru.
And what's nice about this intervention
is that they do very similar things.
Of course, each country has a specific version of it
and slightly different targeting, and in some places
people are given a goat and some people
are given chicken, and so on, and other types of details.
But by and large, it's the same program
that's implemented in different places.
And now that allows us sort of to take together
all of these results, similar to what Esther told you
about credit.
We can now look at, like, six different countries
and look at the average effects, and then it might work better
in some places than in others.
But once you get these overall effects from six places,
that makes us much more comfortable and confident
that we can believe the results so that they're going
to generalize everywhere else.
And then crucially, there is a recent paper by Banerjee et al
that looks at the really long run effects,
like 10 years out now, of a follow up
study of the ultra poor program of the specific site in India.
OK?
And this is really going to be really important because you
really want to know--
we want to know, what are the long run effects?
Because if there are only short run effects, given
that the costs are so high, that's
not going to be worth doing.
You might as well just give people cash instead.
OK.
Now, what do these papers find?
So this is now-- the first one is
sort of the RCT of Bandiera et al in Bangladesh.
And this essentially is looking at the effects after--
you see here the program impacts, the treatment effects.
These regressions, as you've seen before.
You see the treatment effects after two years
and the treatment effects after four years.
I want you to focus mostly on the four years,
partially because in the two years
sometimes these effects take a little bit of time to manifest,
and really, we're interested in long run effects overall.
And what they find essentially is sustained impacts
after four years or large impacts
after four years in terms of lower poverty.
So here you see the four year impacts.
This is a treatment effect.
Then you see the control mean after four year follow up.
So you see, for example, in this population,
62.4% are below the poverty line,
and there's a treatment effect of 8.4% percentage points.
And so then compared to the average and the control group,
that's a 13% reduction in poverty.
That's the 0.084 divided by 0.624.
OK?
So poverty is lower four years later.
They also find higher per capita consumption, about 11% higher.
So per capita consumption is higher.
People have also increased asset values
and they also have a higher cash savings.
So that's to say that's good news.
At least in Bangladesh, it seems like for years there
seem to be effects that are pretty large,
and it reduces poverty.
Now a key question now is, like, well, A,
who does this generalize?
And B, do these effects persist?
For how many years out can we expect
these effects to persist?
Now, next we're going to look at this is a country--
the study with six countries.
What you see essentially here, these are all indices.
They're sort of standardized, essentially.
One issue that comes up which you also
run into when you're looking at the effects of microfinance
in your case is that different places have different units,
different currencies.
Some people are richer than others.
If you want to add up these types of numbers,
what people do, they standardize these variables
by the control group mean, and by the variation.
And then say, what are the standardized effects?
How many standard deviations of effects
as part of the control group mean,
how large are these types of effects?
And essentially, without getting into too much detail,
you see essentially pretty large effects
across the board in terms of per capita consumption, food
security, assets are higher, financial inclusion, total time
spent working, incomes and revenue, physical health,
mental health, even political involvement, amazingly,
women's empowerment, and so on.
So we see lots and lots of positive effects, pretty much,
on all of these.
You might say, well, there are lots and lots
of different outcomes.
Won't we just find some significance anyway effected
by chance?
This is sort of correcting for that
in some sophisticated statistical techniques.
So this is after two years.
This is essentially immediately after the program ended.
OK, so the program starts with giving people some goats,
helping them to deal with it, and so on.
But then there are also people given savings
accounts and other type of support
that takes about two years.
So that's sort of, in some sense,
the effects of the two years.
Crucially now, here is the effect of the four years.
So two years later, and the effects essentially largely
are sustained, seem to be roughly constant.
And that's really crucial.
The crucial part is, do we think these effects are--
so if I give you a bunch of money
and you're going to do better in the short run, you might say,
that's great, but then the question is,
does it help you have higher consumption two years later,
four years later, and so on?
And what seems to be the case is that, for example, assets are,
if anything, similarly high.
Consumption, the effects are similarly high.
Which is to say it's not just people take the asset
or money that they get and spend it down, and therefore
do better in the short run by consuming more.
But instead this investment sort of
has consumption and income benefits for quite a long time
after that.
PROFESSOR: So then you can look at these country by country.
Now I'm showing you here-- these are
figures that show you treatment effects, again,
sort of in standard deviation units.
So it's essentially in terms of a fraction
of the standard deviation of the control group.
And what you see-- this is end line one.
This is after two years.
End line two is after four years.
This is the effect if you aggregate
across all the six settings-- six countries, right?
If you try to put them all together in some ways,
you get this average effect here.
But then you see them country by country.
What we see is there's large differences.
In most countries the effects are positive.
Ethiopia looks great.
You look in Ghana, it looks great.
In India it looks great.
In all of these three countries, in fact, the effects
are somewhat larger in the long run
compared to the short run, which is great.
Then you see some other places in Pakistan
and worked pretty well, I think, overall, but maybe not
amazingly, and the effect is somewhat smaller
after four years.
And in Peru there doesn't seem to be that much going on,
and if anything, in Honduras the treatment group is doing worse
compared to the control group.
And this is, I think, why it's really important
to have six different countries, different settings is, well,
it turns out--
ex-post, at least, if you look at what actually happened,
it turns out that whereas almost everybody, as their asset,
has gotten chicken.
And it turns out most of these chickens die due to illness.
I'm not sure if this is, like, avian flu or other types
of issues, what's going on with those chickens.
But it turned out that happened to be a really bad sort
of asset to have at the time.
And then, of course, the whole program
is not working if the whole program
is around helping you be an entrepreneur, having an asset,
taking care of it, making more money, and so on.

If that's not working out because your chicken dies,
then the whole intervention will not have a lot of an effect.
But that's why it's really important
to have these six different places
because if you take them together overall,
we can be reasonably confident that, overall, we
think there's a positive effect of this intervention overall.
OK?
And then, of course, that raises the question,
and in the future, can you perhaps avoid cases like here,
the case in Honduras, by helping people
take care of the chicken, avoid illnesses, and so on?
Or maybe one wouldn't want to have chicken instead.
One wants to have goat or other types of investment.
But I think as a proof of concept
or as a general sort of lesson, it
seems to be that overall this program works remarkably well.
Now if you look at income and revenues,
it looks kind of similar.
There, actually, Honduras looks pretty good,
perhaps because of the other types of parts of the program.
Ethiopia, in the short run, looks amazingly.
I'm not exactly sure why.
And if you look at per capita consumption, which is perhaps
what we care about the most-- it's
essentially measures of poverty at the end of the day.
You see essentially in almost all places
things look pretty good, except for in Honduras, again.
I'll let you look at this for a second.

OK.
So you might say, OK, great.
This works, at least after two years and four years,
so that's great.
But do these effects really persist?
One thing we can already do a bit is to look at,
does it seem like the effect of the four years
are different compared to the effects of the two years?
So crucially, you want these effects to be constant
and not going down and converging
to the control group.
And for all of the outcomes you essentially
see the light blue bar is pretty similar to the dark blue bar,
so that's pretty encouraging.
But what you can do directly is now look at long run effects
directly, and turns out Abhijit Esther
and Garima Sharma, who's a grad student here in the program,
have, in fact, a 10 year follow up study.
So what you see here is not treatment effects anymore.
This is now per capita consumption.
OK?
Keeping prices constant.
So we look after a month 18.
This is like immediately, I think, in the short run.
Year three, year seven, and year 10.
We have seen already these two here.
That's kind of like what you've seen before,
which is to say there's treatment
effects in the short run.
Let me see India here.
You see there's treatment effect in the short run.
There's also treatment effects in the long run.
But when you look at year seven, year 10,
now if you compare treatment to control
or if you compare things over time,
we're learning two things.
What are the two things we learned from this figure?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Persists and grows.
PROFESSOR: So it persists and grows.
That's one thing that we learned.
So the treatment effect, the difference
between blue and red, persists.
If anything, it gets bigger.
It actually gets much bigger at year seven
compared to year three.
What else do we see?
That's exactly right, and that's,
I guess, already on the slide.
But what else do we see?
What's going on with the red bars?

Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] So spillover effects.
PROFESSOR: Could be spillovers.
I'm not sure we know that.
But I think overall people are actually doing better.
I think this is just a fact that I
think overall poverty fell in those areas in 10 years' time.
But be that as it may, the key part for us
is, of course, the treatment effect persists and it even
grows.
OK?
And now what we can try and do is
trying to do calculations of cost effectiveness.
How would we do that?
How would we do cost effectiveness calculation?
So let me show you first.
So this is here.
This is per capita consumption.
This is monthly income.
You also see there's reasonably small effects here,
reasonably small effects here, but these effects actually
get bigger and they persist, so that's great.
There's also a positive long run effect on food security.
Do people miss meals?
Are they worried about having enough money for their family?
There's effects on physical health,
but also effects on mental health.
OK.
So now if you wanted to do a cost effectiveness analysis,
how would you do this?
What do I mean by this is the following,
which is to say one option we always
have is give people cash.
Right?
I could just give you cash and say, here's money.
Spend it.
I could give you money, say, for 10 years.
I just give you $100 each or $200 each.
We know overall, say the cost of this program,
suppose it's $1,000.
I think it's a little more than that, probably 2,000.
Suppose it's $2,000.
One alternative would be I just give you--
I put the spending money into a bank account
and then give you, I don't know, 10% each year for 10 years.
Yeah.
You can have that constant or different over time.
Now how do we think about that comparison?

Yeah.
STUDENT: For every dollar you spend, how much did the income
increase, and you compare that.
PROFESSOR: Right, but what do we have to do now?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: So we have data points
at 18 months, three years, seven years, 10 years.
Now what?
STUDENT: [? So you have two ?] [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: So I have PPP.
I have-- so let's use consumption
because at the end of the day, suppose
we focus on consumption only.
You want to know how much does your consumption go up.
Suppose I just give you cash.
Your consumption goes up by that amount.
Right?
I give you $100, and your consumption goes up by $100
because you spend it.
That's the outside option.
Now, how do I know how much--
so I know in a given year, in year 10, how much
consumption looks like.
I know year seven, I know year three, and I know month 18.
How do I make this comparison now?

Yeah?
Oh.

Jack?
STUDENT: Yeah, maybe you can discount it
back to the present value using the growth of the control
group.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we can try to have essentially a net--
you need some sort of internal rate of return if you want.
You need to have some form of interest rate.
Suppose I just put the money into a bank account
and then paid people out over time.
We'd get some interest on that and you
have to take account of that.
Essentially the way to do that, then,
is to have a net present value of the consumption
stream over time.
But what numbers am I using now?
How am I doing this?
What do I need to do?
What do I need to assume or think about?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] if the effects
are lasting it will help them through the rest of their life.
So maybe guess how the graph will continue to go.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Exactly.
So we have to figure out some way of saying,
OK, let's take the difference in treatment control here, here,
and here.
That tells you something about treatments effects,
difference between treatment and control
at 18 months, three years, seven years, and 10 years,
and now we have to extrapolate.
One extrapolation would be the treatment
effects lasts forever, and then of course, we're
golden because we can, for a thousand years,
add treatment effects for their families and so on.
That's probably like overoptimistic.
You might say, maybe they last for the lifetime
of that specific family or beneficiary,
or you could say maybe they last for 20 years
or they last for 10 years, or they depreciate.
They go down by 10% every year and so on.
But you have to make different assumptions.
And depending exactly on what these assumptions are,
you will get different numbers.
This one is extremely promising because here actually we
find that the effects are growing over time.
The differences between treatment and control
become bigger over time.
So if that were the case, if it kept growing over time,
at least for another 10, 20 years, then most likely
this would be worth doing.
Now, notice that what I omitted a little bit is-- and this
is, again, what will come up in the case on Monday.
Maybe if I give you $1,000 in cash right now,
maybe you also invest it amazingly and make high returns
and so on.
I said the outside option is just giving people money
over time and they consume it.
Another option could, of course, be that people invest.
If I give $1,000 money, people purchase certain assets
and then get high returns from that
directly without any of the other type of help.
Does that make sense?
Yeah?
STUDENT: The control in this is no aid or equivalent
aid in cash?
PROFESSOR: No aid.
No aid.
Yeah, that's exactly-- that's exactly the question.
The ideal study would be exactly as you say.
The ideal study would be, here's the ultra poor program.
Here's the equivalent amount of cash.
There's a bit of a question how would you do that.
Would you either give people a bunch of cash at the beginning,
or would you give people, say, monthly or yearly installment
and so on.
But this one is control group is essentially business
as usual or no support.
PROFESSOR: The cost benefit analysis
has actually two key issues.
The first one is costs.
We talked about this already.
It's really, really, really expensive.
That's a lot of money for somebody
who earns like $1 a day, spending like $2,000 on a goat
and other types of things.
That's very expensive.
Because, again, the outside option
is just giving people that money directly.
So you have to justify that with relatively long returns.
And so here, for example, it's only worth
it if the benefits persist long into the future.
And Bandiera et al, after four years, consumption is about 11%
higher.
So in the cost benefit analysis, they
assume that consumption increases last until year 20.
And then likely it's going to be profitable to do so.
Of course, it depends also a little bit
on your interest rate.
What would you do with the money in terms of if you just put
the money into a bank account?
If you get really high interest rates,
that's a better idea than if it's not.
So the depreciation rate of benefits turns out to be key.
As I said, here, if anything, the benefits
increase over time.
So it's sort of negative depreciation.
It's actually getting better over time.
So likely, that's worth doing.
The second part, and this is our friend
that we get back to from the beginning of the lecture,
these programs have highly heterogeneous returns.
So what you can do is you can look at quantile treatment
effects.
So say you essentially find some way of ordering people
into people who have the least benefits all the way
until all the people have the most benefits,
and look at whatever the returns for those people.
And that's sort of complicated, and don't
want to get too much into this.
But what you essentially see here is on the y-axis
is people's treatment effects.
And on the x-axis is sort of like organizing people
into different groups and looking
at the people who benefit or likely benefit
are going to be on the right.
The people who benefit the least are going to be on the left.
Now that's not always monotonically
strictly increasing, because there's also noise in the data.
But by and large, what you should see is that on the right
people benefit more than on the left,
if they're sort of heterogeneous treatment effects.
That's to say, if there's some people who
benefit a lot more than others, this curve
should be increasing.
If everybody benefits the same, this curve
should be essentially flat.
If everybody had the same benefits
and would do exactly the same, you should see this curve
being flat.
But what you see is by and large that this curve is really
sort of increasing, in particular for things
like productive assets, in particular
for household assets, but also for consumption expenditures.
This effect here is about close to 100.
Of course, it gets noisy.
And here it's like essentially close to zero,
essentially there are some people--
you see the confidence interval sort of includes
zero, which essentially is to say we can't reject,
we can't say for sure that there's no effect.
It could just be by chance that this is a little bit higher
than zero because the confidence interval, sort
of the uncertainty is large enough that we can't really
say this is a positive effect.
In contrast, here it seems to be clearly people are benefiting.
People have clearly higher assets and so on.
So that's to say, in these types of programs, some people
benefit a lot more than others.
Now if you could just figure out who these people are
and identify those people directly,
maybe what we should be doing is provide
these assets and this type of program
to those types of people.
And then for the remaining ones, perhaps we're going to say,
here's cash or other types of support.
And that would be a better use of everybody's money
because the people of high returns
would essentially invest and get the benefits
of this program, the large benefits of the program
for them.
While everybody else who doesn't have these large returns
would just get other types of consumption benefit.
But the crucial part, of course, now
is to try to figure out how do we identify the people
with the highest returns?
Now how would you find out who has the highest returns?

You come to a village, where you have done this program before--
in a village or different places.
You have your data.
Now how do you figure out who are the people
with the high returns?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Just ask people.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we learned about this a little bit already.
This is what I mentioned before from [? Esther, ?]
you can just ask people.
Now what are the problems or what
are the good and bad things about asking people?
STUDENT: Like local people and villages
will have insights that you don't know about,
the people of village.
But they're also not necessarily financial experts.
So they might think that some indicator
of someone being a good businessman
isn't actually that helpful.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So they have a lot more information than I would have,
because they've lived there all their life.
My neighbor kind of knows whether I
would run a good or bad business from just interacting with me.
Maybe run a business before.
Maybe you have seen me do stuff.
You kind of know people in your neighborhood,
in particular, in these types of villages.
Now you're saying-- exactly right.
People might not necessarily have the right calculation
to use the right metric in terms of-- you're
interested in profits or increases
in consumption in the long run, but that might not necessarily
be what people are picking up when they look at,
does your neighbor seem competent in doing stuff.
Kyle.
STUDENT: They also might be biased [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: And why might they be biased?
STUDENT: They might think is better [INAUDIBLE]..

PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the crucial issue potentially is that, if you ask me,
you have a bunch of money, you are like great program
that you could give to people.
You come to my village and ask, who's
going to be the best entrepreneur?
I'm going to say, I'm going to be amazing.
I'm the best entrepreneur in the village.
You should give me the money.
Now everybody will say that potentially.
And if they don't say that, they might
say their uncle, or their sister,
or their son are really amazing entrepreneurs, or their friends
potentially.
So the issue is essentially incentives in the sense
that if you know that this information will
be used in certain ways later for the allocation of assets,
or this program or money in general, then
people will bias their responses towards themselves potentially.
You could say maybe you can't pick yourself
or the like, but also towards people in their family
and friends and so on.
That's right.
Any other concerns or things or issues?
Now, what do we do about that?

Yeah.
STUDENT: You have to get them to tell you the truth.
So somehow [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So there's essentially ways in which
you can do that in that sort of complicated methods
that don't want to get into.
But essentially, you want to incentivize people.
And the way you might be able to do that is
there's a complicated thing that Drazen Prelec and co-authors--
Drazen Prelec is at MIT Sloan--
has come up a few years ago.
And that essentially is called the Bayesian truth serum,
that essentially is a way to incentivize you in ways that
use everybody else's responses.
And it's sort of an incentive-compatible thing.
That's really hard to understand,
and I'm not sure I understand it.
But essentially, the bottom line from that
is that's an incentive-compatible way
of asking people.
And so the best thing for you in those types of incentives
is to essentially try to tell the truth.
And so what this paper was then trying to,
or the next paper I'm going to tell you,
was essentially trying to do that.
So one thing you could do is ask people in the community.
Another thing, you can essentially
do subgroup analysis.
In some sense you can say, look at women versus men
and old people versus young people,
and different types of businesses, and so on.
You can just essentially try to see, do certain covariates
to certain demographic or other characteristics
of the people in your sample that you have in treatment
and control.
Do those covariates predict whether people
have high returns?
And for that, you don't need to ask people.
You just use your data.
You can go back here and say, look,
we have here some people who have really high returns.
Some people have really low returns.
What are the characteristics of the people
with really high returns?
People to the really low returns?
And we could use that.

