PROFESSOR: Today, we're going to talk about entrepreneurship.
We're going to talk about, what is an entrepreneur?
Are the poor, in particular-- we're
going to talk about this hypothesis
that the poor are naturally born or natural entrepreneurs,
as well as just amazing at being entrepreneurs.
Everybody wants to be entrepreneurs.
And then we're going to talk about the ultra poor program,
which at its heart, is like an entrepreneurship program.
We're trying to help people be entrepreneurs,
but also tries to do a bunch of other things
in the bundled program to improve people's outcomes
or to lower poverty.
And then finally, I'm going to talk a little bit about how
to identify good entrepreneurs, or the entrepreneurs
with the highest return.
Esther has talked a little bit about this already,
but we want to talk about this in a little bit more detail.
OK, let's get started.
So there's lots of entrepreneurship
among the poor, which raises the immediate question, who or what
is an entrepreneur?
How would you define or how would you describe
what's an entrepreneur?

Yes.
STUDENT: I guess someone who runs their own business.
PROFESSOR: Somebody who runs their own business.
OK.
Any other thoughts?
Yeah.
STUDENT: They make the decisions and bear the risks
of their own business.
PROFESSOR: They make the decisions.
So this is kind of what you're saying they sort of run
the place, in some ways.
They own it, perhaps.
And you said they bear the risk.
In what ways?
STUDENT: If their business fails, they need to, like,
use their own money.
PROFESSOR: Right.
They have their own money at stake, often.
Now, of course, not always, like, all of the businesses
that own money.
But often, they have a significant stake
in the business.
And as you say, if the business fails,
if the business goes bust, you lose, essentially,
some of that money, or you have to declare
bankruptcy, et cetera.
Any other thoughts on what's an entrepreneur?
That was great, but any other ideas or thoughts?

No?
OK.
So that's what I kind of already wrote down.
You run or start a business or venture
that involves some capital investment.
So importantly, there needs to be
some capital involved or some capital investment in some way.
Some money goes into that business somehow,
be that by purchasing assets, by hiring people, or buying
products, or inputs, and so on.
And you know the entrepreneur is responsible
for a significant share of the risk of raising capital, right?
So essentially, to be able to make investments,
or to hire people, and so on, you
have to get capital or money somehow.
And the entrepreneur is essentially
raising that capital, but also has, essentially,
money on the line in case the venture does not work out.
That entrepreneur is going to lose at least some
of that money.
OK, does that make sense?
Good.
So how would you measure what fraction of people
are entrepreneurs?
I'm saying there's lots of entrepreneurship
among the poor.
How would you measure that or how would you try to find out?
Giving you some surveys or other types of information,
what would you look for?

Like, in household surveys, are there questions about are you
an entrepreneur?
Yes or no.

Yeah.
STUDENT: You can see they have their own business.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You could ask people about, do you have your own business?
That's often also not even, like, necessarily
in these household surveys.
But what else could you ask?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Are you self-employed?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So self-employment is pretty close.
Notice that that's not necessarily exactly
the same as being an entrepreneur,
you know, but it's pretty close.
And it turns out once you do that, you'll
find that the poor are disproportionately
likely to be entrepreneurs.
So when you look at OECD countries, that's mostly
like rich countries, and ask-- look at questions about
are people self-employed, about 12% of people would say yes.
Who are those people?
And, like, in the US, who are the people
that are self-employed?
Or, like, in Europe, what kind of professions do they do?

Yeah.
STUDENT: My mom was like self-employed
because she was a communications contractor.
PROFESSOR: Uh-huh, so sort of small essentially service
business, essentially?
Any other thoughts?
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: Maybe like farmers or agricultural workers
are often self-employed.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So if you have your own farm.
Now, if you're the worker, probably not,
because somebody else pays you, probably.
But if you have your own farm and so on, yes, then yes.
Angela?
STUDENT: Typically in the US, [AUDIO OUT]
those who belong to innovation hubs
or came up with their own idea have a startup.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So if you run your own startup and so on,
you also would be an entrepreneur.
That would be finance, any other products
or novel, innovative things that you're going to do.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
So a consultant, you could be running your own business
or you could work for a big consulting company.
If your work for the big consulting company,
by our definition, you would not be an entrepreneur
if you work for BCG, or whatever.
But if you sort of start your own business-- or often,
consultants work for big consultancies for a while,
and then they start their own sort of business with others.
That's then often entrepreneur.
STUDENT: Freelancers are like contractors.
PROFESSOR: Freelancers, contractors, exactly.
There's often also lawyers or accountants,
they have their own sort of business by themselves.
There's also gardening businesses
or other sort of services.
But that's about 12% of people.
The fraction among the poor is much higher.
How high is it?

Any guesses?
STUDENT: 40.
PROFESSOR: Any other-- more, less?
Yeah, so 40, 50, it's probably higher than that.
So we have some questions or some survey questions
that sort help us with that.
Notice that this is for people living under a dollar a day.
So these are kind of like surveys for very poor people.
And there, you'll see lots of entrepreneurship
in agriculture.
So if you look at people who are self-employed in agriculture,
lots and lots of people have their own land, essentially.
They have their own piece of land that they own.
They have some machines.
They purchase the inputs, and so on.
And by our definition, that makes you an entrepreneur.
There are some other people who work
for other people on their land, but those are much,
much less common.
And so you hear these different countries.
You see here these are rural areas and urban areas.
This is in agriculture, so of course, you'll
see a lot more in rural areas.
And you see the fraction of people
who are sort of entrepreneur or self-employed by our definition
is very high.
It's like 50%, 60%, 70% in many places.
So, of course, there's variation across places.
But it's on the order of magnitude of 50% to 60%
on average if you take everybody.
Now then, you can look at non-agricultural work.
What kind of workers are those?
What kind of jobs are those?

So agriculture is sort of obvious.
You kind of just grow stuff on your field and farm.
What are the typical non-agricultural work
in low-income countries?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Manufacturing jobs or working [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Tailors, exactly.
Manufacturing jobs are often, you go to a firm,
and so you're employed by somebody.
Of course, you could do your own small-scale,
you make your own widgets, and so on.
Yes.
STUDENT: Like, market sellers.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, food vendors, exactly.
So this lady, for example, I think who's in Vietnam,
you would count her as an entrepreneur,
because she has her own little assets.
She buys sort of inputs.
She makes some things here, and so on,
and then sells them to others, and puts her own money, likely,
on the line, at least in part.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I'm not sure how prevalent
it is in Asian countries, but you a lot
of [INAUDIBLE] communities.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly,
like cleaning businesses, any sort
of-- a lot of, essentially, different service businesses.
Rickshaw drivers, for example, would also count.
Like essentially, you have a little--
or like you have a little bicycle or tricycle where
you transport people around.
You can have your own taxi business,
for example, and so on.
There's lots of transportation, cleaning, et cetera, right.
So barbers, carpenters, shopkeepers, food vendors,
tailors, et cetera.
Many of them are essentially single-person enterprises, so
just one person.
You have your little taxi, and you drive around.
And that would be an entrepreneurial business.
Notice that this is in contrast to what was said previously.
A lot of these businesses don't seem particularly
innovative or kind of--
a lot of things that you might associate with entrepreneurship
or sort of startups and so on in the US
would be you trying to essentially start
a business that takes over a whole area of services,
and so on.
It becomes really large and makes lots of money.
This is not the type of businesses
here, like a tailor, a shopkeeper, food vendor,
and so on tends to be very small.
They, again, return to that, OK?
Now, I can sort of count everybody.
So I'm counting.
Here, I counted non-agricultural work--
sorry, this is non-agricultural work
and this is agricultural work.
Now, of course, a lot of people have both.
But if you look at the fraction overall,
who is employed in either self-employed in any way
in agriculture and non-agricultural
work, that fraction will be even higher than the one
I just showed you previously.
It's on the order of magnitude of 70% to 80%