PROFESSOR: So then let me summarize so far.
And then we'll take a quick break.
So many of the poor entrepreneurs,
these businesses are often pretty simple and not very
successful.
And that leads to a lack of good jobs.
Why is there a lack of good jobs?
Well, if everybody runs their businesses on their own
and doesn't hire anybody else, well, nobody gets hired.
Now, of course, then, because there's no good jobs
available-- people would like these good jobs.
But these good jobs are not available.
Now you have to run your own business
because you'd rather work at a factory or the government,
and so on.
You'd rather be hired for a fixed wage by somebody else.
But these good jobs are not available.
And therefore you have to run your own business.
So therefore nobody creates jobs,
and therefore everybody runs their own business.
And that's sort of a cycle that keeps on going.
Second, many of the businesses are not profitable.
So that seems to sort of say people are not
natural entrepreneurs, or at least many of them are not.
This is also then consistent, as I said already,
as Esther told you about, the lack
of transformative effects of microfinance for most people.
Now, remember what Esther also said in her lecture,
is that we know that for most people,
essentially, microfinance does not reduce poverty,
or people are not increasing any profits.
But she mentioned, at least briefly,
that there is in fact evidence, or some evidence at least,
of large impact of microfinance on some people who
are, they call them, gung-ho entrepreneurs,
who are existing entrepreneurs.
Something like maybe 5% or 10% of people,
once you give them credit, they actually make a lot of money.
They grow their business.
They become richer, and perhaps escape a poverty trap.
That's to say, there is in fact a fraction
of people who are highly talented entrepreneurs who
would benefit a lot.
So in some sense, if you take this curve here--
that's to say most people are essentially on this curve here.
They either don't have enough cash
or are just not savvy enough in some ways
to go on this other curve.
So once you give them a bunch of access to microcredit,
et cetera, and so on, you're not going
to find big effects because essentially they're
sort of stuck on this curve down here.
They might move it a little bit to the right.
They'll make some money.
And then essentially, eventually, they'll
converge back to this point A. But maybe there are 5% or 10%
of people who have access to technology
too, perhaps because they're very savvy
or perhaps they already have quite a bit of money
to start with.
Maybe they can get more money from other people, and so on.
They actually make it to this curve here.
They become richer.
They start hiring people.
They start growing their business, and so on.
And a key question in this literature
is how to identify and support people
who have sustained high returns to capital,
so not just one investment makes high returns,
but over time, they grow their businesses
and have higher profits overall, and will then
grow their businesses and hire other people.
That's really the key question to try and figure out.
A related finding that we're not going to talk about very much
is there's a bunch of people who have
tried different things in terms of training entrepreneurs.
Would be like, can we help you do bookkeeping?
And can we do all sorts of how you should do inventory
and how do you separate your business
from your private expenses, and so on?
And by and large, some of these are sort of
moderately effective.
But by and large, it's not a super successful endeavor.
And I think that's consistent with the idea
that there's a small share of people who are really talented
and should be entrepreneurs.
And maybe they would also actually
benefit from the training more.
Or maybe they're already good at what it is.
But most people either don't want to be entrepreneurs,
they're not good at being entrepreneurs.
And training doesn't really change that very much.
So that then suggests, perhaps instead, we
should try to identify people who are very good at this
and then try to support those because then they
become successful entrepreneurs and potentially hire
a bunch of people.
And again, I want to be very clear.
This is not about saying, like, the poor are bad entrepreneurs
and they don't know what they're doing.
This is saying essentially, just like the rich,
the poor have good and bad entrepreneurs.
And many people, including myself,
are not good entrepreneurs.
I would be terrible at being an entrepreneur.
And therefore, the last thing I'm going to do
is start a business.
And that's fine.
We want to identify people who have high returns who
can grow their business and want to give capital
to those people, because they will be able to grow
their business, have sustained high returns,
and then hire other people.
And these other people then would
be very happy to be hired at a fixed wage.
They'd much rather have a good job
in another business than running their own business as they
don't seem to like that much.
And that's not particularly successful.

Unless you have questions, we're going to take a quick break.
And then, next, we're going to ask
a slightly different question, which is to say,
can we support small-scale entrepreneurship
and other help to reduce extreme poverty?
That's sort of saying like, regardless
of whether people become super rich over time,
is it a good idea--
when you have an anti-poverty program,
is a good idea to provide people with some assets
and help them run some small businesses on their own?
Can you teach people to do that, not necessarily
because they're going to have huge businesses that
help others but because it helps them reduce
extreme poverty over time?
We're going to do that after.
That's what people have referred to often
as the ultra-poor program.