PROFESSOR: So then you can look at these country by country.
Now I'm showing you here-- these are
figures that show you treatment effects, again,
sort of in standard deviation units.
So it's essentially in terms of a fraction
of the standard deviation of the control group.
And what you see-- this is end line one.
This is after two years.
End line two is after four years.
This is the effect if you aggregate
across all the six settings-- six countries, right?
If you try to put them all together in some ways,
you get this average effect here.
But then you see them country by country.
What we see is there's large differences.
In most countries the effects are positive.
Ethiopia looks great.
You look in Ghana, it looks great.
In India it looks great.
In all of these three countries, in fact, the effects
are somewhat larger in the long run
compared to the short run, which is great.
Then you see some other places in Pakistan
and worked pretty well, I think, overall, but maybe not
amazingly, and the effect is somewhat smaller
after four years.
And in Peru there doesn't seem to be that much going on,
and if anything, in Honduras the treatment group is doing worse
compared to the control group.
And this is, I think, why it's really important
to have six different countries, different settings is, well,
it turns out--
ex-post, at least, if you look at what actually happened,
it turns out that whereas almost everybody, as their asset,
has gotten chicken.
And it turns out most of these chickens die due to illness.
I'm not sure if this is, like, avian flu or other types
of issues, what's going on with those chickens.
But it turned out that happened to be a really bad sort
of asset to have at the time.
And then, of course, the whole program
is not working if the whole program
is around helping you be an entrepreneur, having an asset,
taking care of it, making more money, and so on.

If that's not working out because your chicken dies,
then the whole intervention will not have a lot of an effect.
But that's why it's really important
to have these six different places
because if you take them together overall,
we can be reasonably confident that, overall, we
think there's a positive effect of this intervention overall.
OK?
And then, of course, that raises the question,
and in the future, can you perhaps avoid cases like here,
the case in Honduras, by helping people
take care of the chicken, avoid illnesses, and so on?
Or maybe one wouldn't want to have chicken instead.
One wants to have goat or other types of investment.
But I think as a proof of concept
or as a general sort of lesson, it
seems to be that overall this program works remarkably well.
Now if you look at income and revenues,
it looks kind of similar.
There, actually, Honduras looks pretty good,
perhaps because of the other types of parts of the program.
Ethiopia, in the short run, looks amazingly.
I'm not exactly sure why.
And if you look at per capita consumption, which is perhaps
what we care about the most-- it's
essentially measures of poverty at the end of the day.
You see essentially in almost all places
things look pretty good, except for in Honduras, again.
I'll let you look at this for a second.

OK.
So you might say, OK, great.
This works, at least after two years and four years,
so that's great.
But do these effects really persist?
One thing we can already do a bit is to look at,
does it seem like the effect of the four years
are different compared to the effects of the two years?
So crucially, you want these effects to be constant
and not going down and converging
to the control group.
And for all of the outcomes you essentially
see the light blue bar is pretty similar to the dark blue bar,
so that's pretty encouraging.
But what you can do directly is now look at long run effects
directly, and turns out Abhijit Esther
and Garima Sharma, who's a grad student here in the program,
have, in fact, a 10 year follow up study.
So what you see here is not treatment effects anymore.
This is now per capita consumption.
OK?
Keeping prices constant.
So we look after a month 18.
This is like immediately, I think, in the short run.
Year three, year seven, and year 10.
We have seen already these two here.
That's kind of like what you've seen before,
which is to say there's treatment
effects in the short run.
Let me see India here.
You see there's treatment effect in the short run.
There's also treatment effects in the long run.
But when you look at year seven, year 10,
now if you compare treatment to control
or if you compare things over time,
we're learning two things.
What are the two things we learned from this figure?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Persists and grows.
PROFESSOR: So it persists and grows.
That's one thing that we learned.
So the treatment effect, the difference
between blue and red, persists.
If anything, it gets bigger.
It actually gets much bigger at year seven
compared to year three.
What else do we see?
That's exactly right, and that's,
I guess, already on the slide.
But what else do we see?
What's going on with the red bars?

Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] So spillover effects.
PROFESSOR: Could be spillovers.
I'm not sure we know that.
But I think overall people are actually doing better.
I think this is just a fact that I
think overall poverty fell in those areas in 10 years' time.
But be that as it may, the key part for us
is, of course, the treatment effect persists and it even
grows.
OK?
And now what we can try and do is
trying to do calculations of cost effectiveness.
How would we do that?
How would we do cost effectiveness calculation?
So let me show you first.
So this is here.
This is per capita consumption.
This is monthly income.
You also see there's reasonably small effects here,
reasonably small effects here, but these effects actually
get bigger and they persist, so that's great.
There's also a positive long run effect on food security.
Do people miss meals?
Are they worried about having enough money for their family?
There's effects on physical health,
but also effects on mental health.
OK.
So now if you wanted to do a cost effectiveness analysis,
how would you do this?
What do I mean by this is the following,
which is to say one option we always
have is give people cash.
Right?
I could just give you cash and say, here's money.
Spend it.
I could give you money, say, for 10 years.
I just give you $100 each or $200 each.
We know overall, say the cost of this program,
suppose it's $1,000.
I think it's a little more than that, probably 2,000.
Suppose it's $2,000.
One alternative would be I just give you--
I put the spending money into a bank account
and then give you, I don't know, 10% each year for 10 years.
Yeah.
You can have that constant or different over time.
Now how do we think about that comparison?

Yeah.
STUDENT: For every dollar you spend, how much did the income
increase, and you compare that.
PROFESSOR: Right, but what do we have to do now?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: So we have data points
at 18 months, three years, seven years, 10 years.
Now what?
STUDENT: [? So you have two ?] [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: So I have PPP.
I have-- so let's use consumption
because at the end of the day, suppose
we focus on consumption only.
You want to know how much does your consumption go up.
Suppose I just give you cash.
Your consumption goes up by that amount.
Right?
I give you $100, and your consumption goes up by $100
because you spend it.
That's the outside option.
Now, how do I know how much--
so I know in a given year, in year 10, how much
consumption looks like.
I know year seven, I know year three, and I know month 18.
How do I make this comparison now?

Yeah?
Oh.

Jack?
STUDENT: Yeah, maybe you can discount it
back to the present value using the growth of the control
group.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we can try to have essentially a net--
you need some sort of internal rate of return if you want.
You need to have some form of interest rate.
Suppose I just put the money into a bank account
and then paid people out over time.
We'd get some interest on that and you
have to take account of that.
Essentially the way to do that, then,
is to have a net present value of the consumption
stream over time.
But what numbers am I using now?
How am I doing this?
What do I need to do?
What do I need to assume or think about?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] if the effects
are lasting it will help them through the rest of their life.
So maybe guess how the graph will continue to go.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Exactly.
So we have to figure out some way of saying,
OK, let's take the difference in treatment control here, here,
and here.
That tells you something about treatments effects,
difference between treatment and control
at 18 months, three years, seven years, and 10 years,
and now we have to extrapolate.
One extrapolation would be the treatment
effects lasts forever, and then of course, we're
golden because we can, for a thousand years,
add treatment effects for their families and so on.
That's probably like overoptimistic.
You might say, maybe they last for the lifetime
of that specific family or beneficiary,
or you could say maybe they last for 20 years
or they last for 10 years, or they depreciate.
They go down by 10% every year and so on.
But you have to make different assumptions.
And depending exactly on what these assumptions are,
you will get different numbers.
This one is extremely promising because here actually we
find that the effects are growing over time.
The differences between treatment and control
become bigger over time.
So if that were the case, if it kept growing over time,
at least for another 10, 20 years, then most likely
this would be worth doing.
Now, notice that what I omitted a little bit is-- and this
is, again, what will come up in the case on Monday.
Maybe if I give you $1,000 in cash right now,
maybe you also invest it amazingly and make high returns
and so on.
I said the outside option is just giving people money
over time and they consume it.
Another option could, of course, be that people invest.
If I give $1,000 money, people purchase certain assets
and then get high returns from that
directly without any of the other type of help.
Does that make sense?
Yeah?
STUDENT: The control in this is no aid or equivalent
aid in cash?
PROFESSOR: No aid.
No aid.
Yeah, that's exactly-- that's exactly the question.
The ideal study would be exactly as you say.
The ideal study would be, here's the ultra poor program.
Here's the equivalent amount of cash.
There's a bit of a question how would you do that.
Would you either give people a bunch of cash at the beginning,
or would you give people, say, monthly or yearly installment
and so on.
But this one is control group is essentially business
as usual or no support.