PROFESSOR: Now, you might say, OK, lots of people do this.
Now, is that a natural thing, or do
we think the poor are particularly good or bad
at entrepreneurship?
What are advantages or disadvantages
of being an entrepreneur if you're poor
compared to the rich?
Yeah?
STUDENT: I think someone had mentioned it earlier,
but you're taking on much more of the risk.
PROFESSOR: Can you say more?
Exactly, take on more risk.
How so?
STUDENT: Often times it's going to be your own capital.
It's not someone else's capital that you're investing.
Here I think normally it would be a firm's capital,
and they're taking a stake in your business.
In this case, it would be you putting your own money
on the line.
So you're bearing more of the risk.
If this goes under, it's your money that's--
PROFESSOR: Right.
I think that's exactly right.
Now of course, there's also lots of rich people
who put in a lot of their money and have lots of risk involved.
But overall, I think it's true that you
have much less room for margin in the sense
that if I don't have a house, or don't have a lot of money
myself, that's worth a lot.
And I have a little bit of money and now I'm
putting this on the line with my business,
my spouse might not be working, if that business goes bust,
essentially I'll lose a lot, and my family can't eat, and so on.
So the downside is potentially much, much worse.
If I already have $5 million in my bank account
and I'm investing a million into some other business, then
even if that goes bad, I'll be just fine.
That's not to say, again, that rich people don't lose money
and so on, but the risk is much more severe in many cases.
Yeah?
Anybody else?
Mohammed?
STUDENT: Another disadvantage is you don't
have a stable source of income.
[INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: You do not have?
And so how does that matter?
STUDENT: It matters because if you
don't have a stable sense of income,
people might prefer government jobs [INAUDIBLE]..
money to spend on [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, that's sort of related
to what Olivia was saying.
For example, suppose I have a spouse who is employed and has
a stable source of income.
Then it's much easier for me to be an entrepreneur
because now downside risk is even if my business just
goes bust, or it doesn't work out
or whatever, we still have my spouse's regular income.
But many families have nobody who
has a regular income, or large assets,
or stuff they own that they inherited from their parents,
and therefore the downside risk is a lot higher.
Exactly right.
Yeah, Lucas?
STUDENT: It's a lot harder for poor people to borrow or save,
so companies with large capital expenditures
are often out of the question.
PROFESSOR: And why is that?
STUDENT: Well, I mean, if you're unable--
if you need to buy equipment that would be expensive.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, but why is it that if I'm very poor
and I say give me $1 million, people might not do that?
What's the issue?
STUDENT: I mean, I think for the borrowing side,
like in rich countries, you have a credit
history and a lot more data.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Yeah.
You have credit history, you have more data.
What else do you have?
Collateral, exactly.
Often you have some collateral.
You have at least some money that you can put down yourself
and then people are going to be much more likely to give you--
if I have a dollar million and put down my own money,
people are going to be much more likely to give me
some more compared to I have nothing.
Now give me a lot of money.
People will be much more hesitant.
But you also other-- you said other things
like credit history, reputation, et cetera, and so on.
Any other thoughts?
Mm-hmm?
STUDENT: This is kind of related,
but on average, there's a higher barrier to profitability
for poor entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: What does that-- what do you mean?
STUDENT: Just it's harder for them
to turn a profit because of things
like the difficulty to borrow.
Or when they do borrow, much higher borrowing costs,
I guess.
Or if they were to be a street vendor, then
the proportion of their wealth that
has to go into holding the stand, just things like that,
I guess.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So--
STUDENT: --it's a lot of fixed costs that don't scale.
[INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly right.
Exactly.
So if you have a very small business, which
you might have because you don't have a lot of money
or a lot of capital, you're putting
in your labor costs is already pretty large fixed investment.
And if you have a very small scale,
it might be harder to make enough money to make up
for that or become profitable.
At the same time, if you have much higher interest
rates, which the poor also often have
because they don't have collateral
and don't have credit history, and so on, then--
and because the scope of the loan
is often smaller, then exactly, it's harder to be profitable.
Anybody else?

What else do you need to run a successful business?

Yeah?
STUDENT: So there are lots of advantages of spillover effects
if there is a hub of many businesses
and you tend to have that more in rich countries.
So it's easier to come up with an idea
because everyone around you comes up with an idea,
whereas in terms of mere entrepreneurship,
those benefits increased less in [INAUDIBLE] countries.
So even if there is a lot of creativity, and so
there's maybe not either the-- yeah, the environment to really
put that together [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And I think there's two things you're saying.
One is about if you have lots of other people around you
who are entrepreneurs and so on, then you
know you might exchange ideas, or you
might find people who are like-minded
and start businesses, and so on.
Now that, you would think it should
help the poor in some ways because there's lots
of other entrepreneurs around.
But there's crucially also something else,
which is you need connections to other people in some ways.
You need connections to people who have money,
you need to connections to people who are powerful,
and you need connections to people
who might be able to buy your stuff and so on who
are rich enough, and buy a lot of your things, and so on.
And the poor tend to not have that often.
So if you're grown in the US, if your parents are rich,
they are well known in a certain circles
and so on, they can introduce you
to all sorts of people who will be very, very
helpful in running a successful business,
and including, I guess, getting money.
There's one more thing that I think we didn't mention.
Yeah?
STUDENT: Is there an education piece there, too?
They have less education on average than other people?
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly.

Lack of training in terms of things
like accounting, but also in terms
of any other types of education that might be very helpful.
You can't just get an MBA if you're poor,
or if you wanted to run a business,
or any other types of college or other education.
That's exactly right.

Now what are some advantages?
We mentioned some disadvantages.
Now what about advantages?
What might be counter-arguments for this?

Yeah?
STUDENT: There might be more business opportunities
within poor communities that like rich businesses
haven't exploited.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
There's this type of idea of businesses
at the bottom of the pyramid people call it sometimes,
which, essentially, is like, you have a lot of information
about unmet needs or demands that people might
have that if you grown up rich, you might not even dream about.
You don't even know what these things are that people need.
And you might think there's lots and lots
of poor people in many places that have unmet needs
or demands that you might be able to understand much better.
And you might be able to meet them in some way
by coming up with new products, or things, services for them.
Yeah?
STUDENT: And related to that, there's
this idea of decreasing marginal returns.
So if you're right at the start, not only is it easier to supply
stuff because there's less around,
but it's also easier to come up with something
original in a sense because there's nothing around.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So exactly.
In some ways, small scale could be good in the sense
that you don't need to actually sell to millions of people.
You need to just find a few people that you can sell to
and that might be enough for you to make profits.
And then the larger your business becomes, often there's
decreasing returns, or at least in some cases,
and then that's harder to make profits then.
Lucas?
STUDENT: You might be able to benefit from being
able to be more flexible.
So like if you're operating a store
and some inventory is out, it's very easy to pivot
towards what people want to buy because you're often buying
in very small quantities.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
There's a little bit more flexibility
and that's kind of what I mean here
in the second bullet point.
The smaller scale operation gives you some benefits
as well in the sense that you attract less scrutiny.
For example, suppose you do something that pollutes
the environment in some way.
If you do this at a huge scale, people will be onto you
and you get in trouble very easily.
Suppose you do this in a very small scale,
probably nobody will bother to go after you in some way.
But you're selling other things.
There's more flexibility.
It's easier to pivot because you don't
have-- you haven't made huge investments in certain things.
So it's easier to say, perhaps we're doing something
different, or , pivoting and so on.
So then there's-- and then at the same time, there's also,
in a way, fewer outside options.
That's not necessarily a reason why
you'd be more successful, but perhaps
why it's more attractive for people to be an entrepreneur.
If you can't get another good job that pays you well anyway,
then you might want to be an entrepreneur because you're
going to make that money at least
and then you're your own boss in some ways.
So then that, of course, then raises the question, well,
why are so many of the poor entrepreneurs if it's
quite difficult for them?
So this is-- you might have seen or heard
at least from Muhammad Yunus in Esther's lecture on credit,
or microcredit.
This is the person who won the Nobel Prize for the Grameen
Bank as being the banker, as he called,
as the banker of the poor for essentially offering
microcredits to millions and millions of people and arguing,
essentially, that the poor are natural entrepreneurs.
What is sort of the implication, or what is the argument here?
So we just said, there's lots of reasons
why it's hard to be an entrepreneur if you're poor,
not so lots of reasons that you want to be.
There's lots of reasons not to be an entrepreneur.
Now why are people entrepreneurs anyway?
What is this argument here?
Yeah?
STUDENT: There's a smaller job market outside
of entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: So that's one, but that's not-- that's correct,
but that's not necessarily Yunus--
so let's say they don't have a lot of other options.
We can return to that.
That's exactly right.
But that's not quite Yunus' argument.
What is Yunus' argument?

Yeah, in the back?
Yeah.
STUDENT: It was kind of the idea that the poor don't always
have as much available to them, so they're
able to make more of what they have and they're
used to doing that.
So the idea of being natural entrepreneurs.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I think the argument is essentially
that people are very savvy in one way or the other.
And here's one quote.
I was looking at some of Yunus' quote.
And one of them says, "In my experience,
poor people are the world's greatest entrepreneurs.
Every day they must innovate in order to survive.
They remain poor because they do not
have the opportunities to turn their creativity
into sustainable income."
That's essentially saying two things.
One is that they're very savvy and very talented,
and many of them, pretty much everybody,
and this is another quote of his, is saying,
we are all natural entrepreneurs.
Everybody can be an entrepreneur.
And the difference between the rich and the poor
is just that the poor don't have money.
So then the second argument is, well,
if we just gave people access to credit, if we just gave people
money, then everybody would run their business,
and make more money, and become--
grow, essentially, out of poverty.
Now you already learned from Esther
during the credit lecture that that's not necessarily
the case in the sense that once people have access
to microcredit, few people start businesses,
few people do well in those businesses,
and overall, it's not necessarily
a poverty-alleviating intervention.
We're going to return to that as well.
But that's the argument.
So let's try to entertain this argument for a bit
and let's try to see can we find evidence,
or what can we learn about the poor
being natural entrepreneurs.