PROFESSOR: We talked about, now, size.
Now, what types of-- or we talked a little bit about types
as well.
What about all these other ones-- multiplicity
and durability aspirations.
What else do we know?

How many businesses do people have?

Yes?
STUDENT: A lot of times people will
have more than one business if they're not
putting all their resources into growing that one
sector of the business.
PROFESSOR: So they have not one business, but two or three.
So here is the fraction of households that receive income
from multiple sectors.
You see that fraction is often very high.
Lots of people in rural areas have two sectors,
which is essentially agriculture and nonagricultural sectors.
So they run some agriculture business,
and then they also have some other shop or stuff like that.
But also, even in urban areas, you
see people do multiple things.
Now, why might you do that?
Why might you just say, OK, I'm choosing whatever
is my best business, my most profitable in business
and invest everything I can into that business
and try to grow it?
What are reasons not to do that?
Why might you do three things instead?

STUDENT: You're not very susceptible to shocks there.
So if your business fails, [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: So that's essentially a diversification issue,
which is to say once you have three businesses--
one goes under--
then at least you have two others left
that give you some income source.
That's essentially like, similarly,
if you invest in finance into a portfolio,
you want to diversify your portfolio.
Investing in different things helps you diversify.
That's exactly right.
Any other argument?

Yes, Lucas.
STUDENT: Also, businesses might have
diminishing returns at a time.
Like, for example, if you have the shopkeeper,
like, yes, if they were able to buy more inventory,
they could sell more.
But they don't have the capital for that,
so there's not really any sense of them
keeping the shop open because they don't have anything
to sell.
So they have to spend their time doing something else.
PROFESSOR: Exactly right, so we'll
talk about this in a second or a little bit later as well.
But essentially, for each type of businesses
that people at least are in currently,
that have a certain production function,
and that production function is essentially very concave,
which is to say there's very quickly diminishing returns.
So suppose I'm selling bananas in my neighborhood.
There's only so many bananas I can
sell in part because there's lots of other banana
sellers in my neighborhood.
So I can only sell to the 20 people around me.
And so I don't want to only sell bananas because then otherwise,
I would just be very hard for me to find other customers.

Yes, Astrid.
STUDENT: Maybe they have more free time because,
for example, if you're stubborn, and maybe you just sell
in the morning, and no one will buy in the afternoon,
so you have nothing to do in the afternoon.
So you want to find other stuff to do.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly right.
So there are certain businesses that are essentially
time specific, where you sell to people
in the morning-- some breakfast.
You make tea for people where people in certain times
only demand your product or coffee shops,
for example, which are also true for some transportation where,
sometimes, there's rush hour-- your relative customers--
but then, at other times, not very much.
Now that's also true for agriculture and rural areas.
Often, there's essentially the planting season,
and there's harvest, and so on.
But then other than those seasons,
often, there's not that much to do.
And what people call the lean season, in particular,
you're essentially just waiting for your crops
to grow until harvest comes or until you can harvest.
And so there's just not that much other stuff to do.
And so then you might as well try
what many people do in India, for example-- in rural India--
try to do some casual labor work for somebody else.
But you might also try to have your own businesses
and have a little shop or other types of things
where you sell stuff.
Any other reasons?

Maybe talk about this-- mostly seasonal businesses diversify
your portfolio, a lack of capital, as well, in the sense
that you would just need to invest to make
a really large business.
And you might say if you have two people,
you might have a little shop, and so
you use, essentially, your labor for each of these businesses--
husbands and wife or spouses or people in the family.
But there's not a lot of capital,
so you would need a lot of money to have
one big business to do that.
But two small ones might be easier, to do.
Now, notice that, also, that implies some limited benefits
from specialization.
We talked about specialization a little bit in a sense
that you might have a few products
or things within your shop or whatever you're doing.
But there's also specialization from only
doing one thing as opposed to doing three or four
different jobs.
And so it's much easier to do one thing very well
than doing three things or four things at a time.

So we talked about multiplicity, and what
about durability and aspirations?
How long are these businesses lasting?

So check on who has done the readings.

Yes.
STUDENT: He said a lot of them last under five years, which
goes back to multiplicity because stuff
is like [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so if you don't have a big stake in something--
if you do a little thing where you sell some stuff;
you don't have invested a lot--
and then you have five different businesses or three,
and one of them doesn't work out, that's fine.
And so here's-- let me show you this--
a survey that was done also with people under $1 a day
and about--
this was in 2002, quite a while ago.
But I think the insights are still right.
About 15% of those living under $1 a day
reported running a business.
I think this is an urban area.
15% have a business in 2002.
Then people were surveyed again in 2005,
and 6% still say they have the same business.
That's to say 60% of the businesses of the 15%,
essentially, are out of business-- not there anymore.
And then 1.8% say, I still have the original workforce
until 2005.
So essentially, there's a lot of turnover.
People start businesses.
People stop businesses.
Businesses don't work out, and so on.
Of course, that also implies that businesses
are often small.
If your business is only a year old,
it's very hard to have a large business.
Usually, it takes quite a while until businesses grow.
But the typical business, essentially,
doesn't last very long.
Now, finally, aspirations-- do people
want to be entrepreneurs?
When you ask them, or how would you know?
What would be a good idea to ask them,
or how can you figure out?
Yes, Julie.
STUDENT: In the reading example, they
said that the parents wanted their children
to work for the government and have or be a teacher
or have a stable job.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, and so why do we ask about the children
and not about the people themselves?
Why not just ask, do you want to be an entrepreneur,
or would you rather do something else?
STUDENT: Maybe, the catch is your personal accounts.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I think it's much harder
to say-- if you ask me, would you
rather be a professor or something else, if I say,
I'd rather or should have done something different,
I say I kind of screwed up.
I should have done something different,
or maybe, I am just, right now, not
competent to do anything else, which is probably true.
So in some sense, it's a little bit
of a weird question if you ask me now,
what would you like to do, if I'd rather
be a physicist, it's like I'm entirely incompetent to be
a physicist, so then, therefore, I probably
will not be a physicist.
But that doesn't mean that I might not want to do that,
but acknowledging that, it would say I
made wrong choices in the past and so on.
So people are probably more likely to say,
I like the thing I do.
But once you ask about children, it's
much more about, what is it, really,
ideally, that we want them to do?
Now you said exactly right.
People essentially say that--
let me show you this here--

people say they want to be private firm
employees or, essentially, wage workers, government teachers,
or non-teaching government jobs.
Essentially, people want to not run their own business.
They want to work for the government.
They want a stable income either through some firm or, even
better, the government.
There's another question that asks the same questions about--
in case of a lottery win--
that's essentially a similar reason to what I just told you
about, which is to say, well, maybe people say,
oh we can't really do anything else.
My kid needs to work in the business
because we need that to survive.
When you ask people about, well, if you one box
the lottery, what would you like,
people gave very similar answers,
so it's not so much about constraints and so on.
So that seems, essentially, to say
people don't seem to be super committed to their businesses
overall.
They don't seem to be super excited about their business
in the sense that they abandoned a business quite often.
They start and invent new ones and so on.
They also seem to be don't seem to be investing particularly
much in their businesses.
Now, one thing I want to be very clear about--
and I want to be very precise about this--
is that doesn't mean that there's not
a lot of incredibly talented and dynamic entrepreneurs
among the poor.
It might well be that there's 5% of people who are really,
really good entrepreneurs and maybe 1% of people
who are really good entrepreneurs
and they should be entrepreneurs.
What I'm commenting on is the claim
that, essentially, everybody should be an entrepreneur.
And if you think about yourself or your class
or your classmates and friends, maybe 1%, maybe 5%,
maybe 10% of people should try to be an entrepreneur.
But being an entrepreneur is incredibly hard,
and only a small fraction of people
will decide to be an entrepreneur,
and only a small fraction of those
will actually be successful.
And what I'm saying here is that for the rich
and for the poor, that's pretty similar.
And the claim that the poor are natural entrepreneurs
or particularly good or just extremely savvy by being poor--
just learn how to be an entrepreneur--
does not seem to be true in the data.
Again, that doesn't mean that there's not
a fraction of people who could be amazing entrepreneurs
and that whom we should support and to grow
their businesses and so on.
But the idea that everybody should be an entrepreneur
doesn't seem to be quite right.
So then let me summarize what we just said.
We say, what do we know about businesses among the poor?
Most businesses of the poor are very small--
few, very few machines, other forms of capital.
Many people run several businesses in part
due to diversification.
There's high turnover.
Many businesses fail or close for other reasons,
and people don't seem to have great aspirations in terms
of wanting to be an entrepreneur.