PROFESSOR: So we're back.
A key policy question, as we identified,
is how to identify and support people who
have high returns to capital.
And we're going to go next.
Let's talk a little bit about whether we can first--
whether we think supporting small scale entrepreneurship,
plus some other help is reducing extreme poverty,
and then we're going to return to the targeting question
and say, even if that's true, is it
the case that we can identify there's
a certain group of people who benefits the most?
And would it make sense to, perhaps, focus on those?
OK?
So there's a very successful program
that I'm going to tell you a little bit about now,
which is called the ultra poor program graduation approach.
And it's very much like a pretty comprehensive program
that does a lot of things.
It has key ingredients.
Beneficiaries are often identified by the community.
So essentially you try to find people
who are what people often refer to as ultra poor.
So people who are really, really poor.
They're too poor, for example, to qualify for microfinance
in many situations.
OK.
So these are essentially people who have next to zero.
People have received an asset transfer.
Often you see here a goat, sometimes a chicken,
sometimes other types of animals.
So you get an asset that's often quite
a bit of money, something like $250 purchasing power parity.
They also get some income support for a few weeks.
So they get-- in addition to receiving the asset,
they also get some money to just be
able to focus, perhaps, on the new asset on their business.
They get some technical support, including
some hand-holding and other support that,
for example, would explain how to take care of the asset
and support people, and other questions that they might have.
There's often some component on group meetings, coaching,
health, and so on that's often relatively minor
but it also exists.
And then there's also access to a savings account,
as we talked about before, but essentially
gives people some way to save money
if they would like to do so.
OK?
So it's a pretty comprehensive program.
If that program works, it's a little bit hard
to understand exactly why it works,
and the current literature, in part,
is trying to figure this out.
But it does a lot of different things,
and the idea is that once you do lots of different things
at the same time, then perhaps that's
more helpful than doing each of these things on their own.
Or just more broadly, once you do them,
that's just an effective way to help people.
That's to say, rather than doing one thing at a time,
why not do all of those things?
And perhaps then once I'm taking care of your ability
to save your health or just your cash needs in the short run,
maybe that's better for you because now you
can focus on your goat or the asset that you have.
But otherwise if you have so many other things going on
in your life that you have to worry about and have
to deal with, perhaps that that'll
make you worse at dealing with your asset or goat.
Notice that this is very expensive overall.
So not only is the asset quite expensive.
In addition, it's not cash.
So in GiveDirectly, remember, when you give directly right
now, if you told your family over Thanksgiving
or over the winter break that if they wanted to give money
to the poor, say, in Kenya, you can tell them,
look, if you give $100, I think something like 90%,
roughly, will end up at a poor person's phone
that they can use on their own directly with very little
overhead.
This is not this.
This is a lot more overhead because you
have to do all sorts of things in terms of figuring out
which assets are right.
You have to get a bunch of goats.
You know you get the goats to people.
You have to make sure that the goats are surviving, and so on.
This is a much more complicated and involved thing
that makes it also much more expensive.
Again, on Monday you're going to try in the case
to try to compare GiveDirectly versus this ultra poor program
and try to think about why is one or the other
perhaps better.
But overall, I think one clear issue here
is that it's very expensive.
Now it's also a package, and so-- but the idea here
is that then if this is effective,
the reason why this might be a good idea to do
is if you can increase people's earnings sustainably over time.
So it's not just say, like, next year you're
going to have higher income, or in two years
you're going to have higher income.
The idea is if you get your income
to increase for 10, 20 years through this program by, say,
something like $100 each year or a little bit more,
then it's going to be worth doing that because it's
going to be worth those costs.
But the idea is very much like if there's no long run
effects of this type of thing, this is not a good idea
because then you might as well just give people cash
because doing all these other activities is very expensive.
Does that make sense to everybody?
OK.
So now it turns out there's quite a few very impressive
studies that people have done over the past few years.
There's one paper which is Bandiera et al doing
an RCT of the [INAUDIBLE] NGO that
works in many places now, but in particular
at the time in Bangladesh.
So that's an RCT of an ultra poor program in Bangladesh
that follows up with people after two years
and after four years.
So that's already quite long.
But that's specifically one type of intervention in Bangladesh.
You might say, well, does this work just in other places
as well?
If it works in Bangladesh, how do I
know that it wasn't just specific to Bangladesh
and that the program works well?
It's just sort of a generalizable finding.
And so then there's a paper by Abhijit Banerjee Esther
Duflo and a bunch of other coauthors
that do a quite similar intervention in six
countries, Ethiopia, Ghana, Honduras, India,
Pakistan, and Peru.
And what's nice about this intervention
is that they do very similar things.
Of course, each country has a specific version of it
and slightly different targeting, and in some places
people are given a goat and some people
are given chicken, and so on, and other types of details.
But by and large, it's the same program
that's implemented in different places.
And now that allows us sort of to take together
all of these results, similar to what Esther told you
about credit.
We can now look at, like, six different countries
and look at the average effects, and then it might work better
in some places than in others.
But once you get these overall effects from six places,
that makes us much more comfortable and confident
that we can believe the results so that they're going
to generalize everywhere else.
And then crucially, there is a recent paper by Banerjee et al
that looks at the really long run effects,
like 10 years out now, of a follow up
study of the ultra poor program of the specific site in India.
OK?
And this is really going to be really important because you
really want to know--
we want to know, what are the long run effects?
Because if there are only short run effects, given
that the costs are so high, that's
not going to be worth doing.
You might as well just give people cash instead.
OK.
Now, what do these papers find?
So this is now-- the first one is
sort of the RCT of Bandiera et al in Bangladesh.
And this essentially is looking at the effects after--
you see here the program impacts, the treatment effects.
These regressions, as you've seen before.
You see the treatment effects after two years
and the treatment effects after four years.
I want you to focus mostly on the four years,
partially because in the two years
sometimes these effects take a little bit of time to manifest,
and really, we're interested in long run effects overall.
And what they find essentially is sustained impacts
after four years or large impacts
after four years in terms of lower poverty.
So here you see the four year impacts.
This is a treatment effect.
Then you see the control mean after four year follow up.
So you see, for example, in this population,
62.4% are below the poverty line,
and there's a treatment effect of 8.4% percentage points.
And so then compared to the average and the control group,
that's a 13% reduction in poverty.
That's the 0.084 divided by 0.624.
OK?
So poverty is lower four years later.
They also find higher per capita consumption, about 11% higher.
So per capita consumption is higher.
People have also increased asset values
and they also have a higher cash savings.
So that's to say that's good news.
At least in Bangladesh, it seems like for years there
seem to be effects that are pretty large,
and it reduces poverty.
Now a key question now is, like, well, A,
who does this generalize?
And B, do these effects persist?
For how many years out can we expect
these effects to persist?
Now, next we're going to look at this is a country--
the study with six countries.
What you see essentially here, these are all indices.
They're sort of standardized, essentially.
One issue that comes up which you also
run into when you're looking at the effects of microfinance
in your case is that different places have different units,
different currencies.
Some people are richer than others.
If you want to add up these types of numbers,
what people do, they standardize these variables
by the control group mean, and by the variation.
And then say, what are the standardized effects?
How many standard deviations of effects
as part of the control group mean,
how large are these types of effects?
And essentially, without getting into too much detail,
you see essentially pretty large effects
across the board in terms of per capita consumption, food
security, assets are higher, financial inclusion, total time
spent working, incomes and revenue, physical health,
mental health, even political involvement, amazingly,
women's empowerment, and so on.
So we see lots and lots of positive effects, pretty much,
on all of these.
You might say, well, there are lots and lots
of different outcomes.
Won't we just find some significance anyway effected
by chance?
This is sort of correcting for that
in some sophisticated statistical techniques.
So this is after two years.
This is essentially immediately after the program ended.
OK, so the program starts with giving people some goats,
helping them to deal with it, and so on.
But then there are also people given savings
accounts and other type of support
that takes about two years.
So that's sort of, in some sense,
the effects of the two years.
Crucially now, here is the effect of the four years.
So two years later, and the effects essentially largely
are sustained, seem to be roughly constant.
And that's really crucial.
The crucial part is, do we think these effects are--
so if I give you a bunch of money
and you're going to do better in the short run, you might say,
that's great, but then the question is,
does it help you have higher consumption two years later,
four years later, and so on?
And what seems to be the case is that, for example, assets are,
if anything, similarly high.
Consumption, the effects are similarly high.
Which is to say it's not just people take the asset
or money that they get and spend it down, and therefore
do better in the short run by consuming more.
But instead this investment sort of
has consumption and income benefits for quite a long time
after that.