PROFESSOR: So then next--
we talked about this a little bit already.
Are these businesses profitable?
How would you measure profits?

How would you find out?
Or what's tricky about measuring profits?

Yeah.
STUDENT: Opportunity costs.
PROFESSOR: Say more.
Opportunity costs, what are those?
STUDENT: Like, when you're making stuff
for rich countries for more money,
the [INAUDIBLE] best of the day if possible could have
done something better with it.
It's one of the ways to measure profitability
so that you-- part of the nature work on some
of those-- interest rates are really high.
So it's impossible to use interest rates to do this.
So you'd have to find other ways to measure profitability.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So you're saying the bar, essentially,
is very high because interest rates are high.
And you want to compare an investment of, say,
$100 or $1,000 or $1 million, you want to say,
what returns should you get if you invested in, say, the stock
market.
Or, what is the return that you have to pay?
And you're saying that the interest is higher,
and therefore, it might not be profitable or--
STUDENT: Like, comparatively.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So interest rates are high, that's exactly right.
But now, how would you measure whether it's profitable
overall?
How do we measure profits?
Yes, Julie.
STUDENT: So should you subtract like--
if you have a wage.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And so what's tricky about that?

STUDENT: They might not be able to get a government job
or something with a comparable wage.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So if I run my banana shop, you asked me, what are my profits?
I'm going to tell you, here is my revenues--
how much have I sold?
Here are my costs--
how much did I pay for inputs?
Maybe I paid some employees.
Maybe I have some rent to pay for my little shop,
or maybe I own it myself.
But the crucial part, essentially,
is labor costs and how do I account for that.
I spent all day in my shop, and I'm
saying I'm working eight hours a day or 10 hours a day
or whatever.
Now, the question is, how do we value that, right?
And so that's different from, like,
in rich countries, where if you look at any other company--
because there, people are just paid their salary.
Everybody is paid their salary-- maybe sometimes not the owner.
But the vast share of people essentially
is paid some salary, so we can just
look at the wage bill and measure
how much are people paid.
So then the profits are essentially
revenues minus costs, which include
capital costs and labor costs and any other costs that
are there.
But here, labor costs, the vast share of labor costs
are essentially unpaid in some ways.
And so then that makes it much trickier.
So how would you go about this?
If I told you I'm working 10 hours--
I don't have a job otherwise.
I'm just working in my business.
How would you go about trying to measure my labor costs?

Yes, Moni.
STUDENT: Get sort of a minimum cost for everyone.
And if that person spends their own time, then--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
You have to do something-- you have to find some measure.
People have tried to do different assumption.
One assumption is to say just use the minimum wage.
And just say that's like, in some sense,
a lower bound how much you should be paid
is the minimum wage.
Another version of that would be just the going-market wage,
is to say, how much is a typical person with your qualification
paid who's working in the labor market?
All of these are imperfect because there's often
selection involved.
There's a reason why I'm working in my banana business
as opposed to in the labor market, being paid.
That could be because I'm more qualified or less qualified,
or more productive, less productive, motivated,
and so on.
But it's a pretty good approximation.
So once you do that, once you measure household labor priced
at a minimum wage, most businesses essentially
lose money.
Now, I think Kyle was saying already
is, like, well, on the other hand,
they pay high interest rates, so the marginal returns must
be high.
What do I mean by this?
I mean by this, people take loans.
Many businesses take loans.
Interest rates are very high, and these loans
are often paid back.
That must essentially mean that if I'm taking $100 loan
and I'm paying a 20% interest rate,
that must mean that the rate of return on that investment
is at least 20%.
Because otherwise, I would eventually not
be able to pay back or would not take that loan anymore
in the future.
So essentially, rates of return are
high when people invest in their business.
They make actually quite a bit of money
because that allows them to pay back their loans.
Now, how are these things consistent?
So on the one end, I'm saying the marginal return
to capital is high.
On the other hand, I'm saying that these businesses
lose a lot of money.
How do these things fit together?
I'll you think about this for a second.

Yes.
STUDENT: Marginal return might be high, but total return low.
So it doesn't really--
the two things can coexist.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So the marginal return might be high,
but the average return-- or essentially, there's
lots of fixed costs involved.
So, for example, if I work myself in this business,
my labor cost's actually pretty high
because I could work somewhere else
and make some money at least.
And now I invest a little bit.
I make a very high return investing, right?
Because the first investment, the marginal return
is very high.
But if I invested a lot more, perhaps returns
would be going down.
Or essentially, the small scale--
this is, I think, what Zion was saying earlier--
the scale is too small to make up for the labor or the fixed
costs that I might have.
OK?
So the small scale doesn't make it profitable.
Now then the next question, of course,
is, well, why are we still stuck at this small scale?
So why are people not investing more in growing their business?

Yes.
STUDENT: I know one thing talked about in the reading was
a lot of these businesses-- we were saying earlier-- only
have one employee now.
But as you grow your business, you also
have to start paying more employees.
That's additional cost.
And it's just hard to manage running a bigger business
if you only run such a small business before.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So one issue is--
the reason you might say why people have so many family
businesses and so on is because supervising other people
is hard.
There's often not a lot of enforcement in courts.
And there's not a lot of trust, in some ways,
perhaps because of that.
So then if you wanted to hire seven other people,
it would be hard to monitor them and make sure that they're
doing what they're doing.
And so, therefore, people just say it's not
worth doing that expanding.
That's one broad argument.
And that's why people often have family labor
because they trust their family more,
and that's sort of more reliable, potentially.
Of course, you might also have your incompetent uncle
in your small firm whom you'd rather not have,
but you have to do that because of family pressures.
That's one reason.
Any other reasons?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Because there's sort of, I think,
a threshold you reach, where if you've made more investment--
for example, in fixed costs or whatever--
the marginal return would be extremely high.
But then it's risky.
And then you have three of those on your hands,
so which one you pick?
So you don't really know.
So you'd rather keep them, all three at the threshold,
where you still make money with them
but it doesn't get too expensive,
and it's not too risky.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
Essentially, that's our old friend, the poverty trap,
if you remember.
And this is, in some sense, some form
of a poverty trap argument, which
is to say there's essentially two technologies or two
different production functions or things
that you can invest in.
One is-- this is sort of the curve p here that you see,
where, essentially, returns are very high initially,
and then they flatten off very quickly.
And it gets very, very flat.
So once you invest more and more,
essentially, it's not worth doing.
It gets very flat.
And then there's a different technology,
which is the one here that starts at q,
that starts much further out.
So think of this as, like, a much more complicated
technology.
You need big machines.
You need lots of money and so on.
If you could invest in that technology,
you would need a lot of money.
And it's only worth investing in this technology
if you have a lot of money or using that technology
if you have a lot of money.
You buy a big machine.
And if you invest a lot of capital,
then you're going to make a lot of money
and become potentially quite rich.
If you use technology one, you're
going to be stuck at point m.
You're not going to go anywhere.
Notice then you need a bunch of money
to be able to use the second technology.
You need a lot of investment in capital.
And then you want to end up here at this point up there.
OK?
And so that's essentially to say that the reason that people
are not investing is because they're
sort of in this technology.
Now, if they had a huge amount of money,
they could switch technology, do something
more complicated and so on.
Often, perhaps, that also requires a lot more skill,
and that's more complicated.
And you have manage people, you have complicated
production processes and so on.
So if you could use this other technology,
that'd be really helpful and profitable.
But many people are not able to do that for reasons--
A, they don't have the capital.
And, B, perhaps it's also a complicated thing
to do that requires a lot of skill
and you need to be a very savvy investor or entrepreneur.
And so there's actually some evidence for, at least,
the limited scope for growth in this technology
here, the technology 1.
There's a very nice paper by [INAUDIBLE] et. al.
that look at what people call cash drops for entrepreneurs,
where essentially, they just drop money on entrepreneurs
and say, here's $250 or here's $500.
Do with it whatever you want to do.
You can invest in your business.
You can do whatever you want with it.
And then they track people's profits afterwards.
And what they find, they find very high returns.
They find something like 60% return
on average on the first $250 compared to a control group
who doesn't get this money.
But then if you look at-- there's
another group who received $500.
And among those who received $500,
many people only invest 250, or about half of this,
and then just don't invest the rest-- presumably
because maybe there's high returns at the margin.
Like here, there's high returns here,
but then it flattens out very quickly.
So then people don't bother to invest further
in their business.
And then perhaps $250 are not enough to go on this train here
to technology number 2.
Does this make sense to people?
This is also explained in detail in the book if you remember.
