PROFESSOR: Now what do we actually
know about the businesses of the poor
in these types of dimensions?
Talked about it already a little bit,
but what do we know about them?
You can pick whatever you want to talk about.

Yeah?
STUDENT: It's the size that was spoken about a lot.
They're very small, and it's not really scalable.
PROFESSOR: They're very small.
It's often not scalable.
It's often like-- how small is small?
How many people?
STUDENT: I think some of them were--
most of them were 1 in 40.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, either it's essentially just single person
is I run my own taxi shop.
That's just me.
Or often, it's one or two people involved.
Businesses are essentially tiny, both
in terms of employees-- and what way are they also small?
So it's like labor inputs, but also--
STUDENT: Market cap as well as the number
of people that they serve.
PROFESSOR: Right, the number of people they serve is small.
What else?

Yeah?
STUDENT: I think there are a lot of people
that have similar businesses in close proximity.
[INAUDIBLE] you were talking about,
they don't really come together and make a bigger business.
They stay separate.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
I don't have that in here, actually, I think,
but you're exactly right.
Not only are they very small businesses,
there's also lots of them in the same area.
So they're, in some ways, also not particularly innovative
businesses in some ways.
If there's 20 people doing exactly the same thing,
if you're number 21 and start your businesses,
that's not a particularly innovative or new idea.
It's just do it for us for other reasons.
And that, of course, in turn, limits growth in some ways.
If there's already 20 people doing the exact same thing
as I'm doing, unless we merge in some way, which people don't
seem to be doing very much, then you
get businesses are going to be small.
That's right.
But in in terms of-- in addition to [INAUDIBLE] labor
input, what other inputs or what other things are small?
So demand or the market size is small.
What else?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] offer a product,
like you have little shops in which [INAUDIBLE] diversity
and so, obviously, people buy less
and because they may be just shelves empty [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Right, and why is so little offered?
What's the reason?
If you run a little shop, why don't you
just offer everything?

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]---- well, first of all, it might be,
perhaps, expensive to buy a product [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
You don't have a lot of capital, so then you're
just going to sell one or two things.
For example, I spent a lot of time in Chennai
while working on some research, and there,
every morning, I really like eating bananas, especially
small bananas.
And there was a guy who ran a shop who had,
I think, bananas, newspapers, and cigarettes he was selling,
and that's what he was doing.
And he seemed to be doing fine, but there
was nothing else offered.
And the reason, probably, was that, A, his store was
extremely small, and, B--
so you couldn't even store that much more.
Of course, you could have expanded.
But B, buying more things is expensive,
and you need capital to do that.
STUDENT: In a way, it could also because people around you
in your neighborhood just know that you're
the guy selling that?
Well, perhaps, there's loads of people around who do the same,
but they rely on [INAUDIBLE] reliability [INAUDIBLE]
you'll always have bananas?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, I guess some specialization is helpful.
And otherwise, you'd have to hire probably
more people and so on.
And so, in some sense, it's easier
to specialize on one or two things compared to a lot.
The other thing I think that--
so let me sort of back up for a second and get back to this.
So one is the total number of employees is very small.
This is the total number of employees overall,
including unpaid employees.
So this would be if your uncle or your child or your spouse
also works with you.
The average number of employees, overall, is about one.
That's on average.
The number of paid employees is even much lower.
So a lot of these employees are essentially
unpaid family members.
When you just look at the paid ones
that number is about 0.15 on average.
Now, of course, this is selected on people
living under $1 a day, but many of them [INAUDIBLE]
have these businesses, and they don't really hire anybody else.
They just run it on their own or they have a family business
overall.
So then, this is sort of the other part
that's small in terms of businesses--
essentially, machines.
Only about half of these businesses
own any type of machine--
and just so you know, of course, ranges and so on.
And what does that imply for the businesses, how they run?
Well, that means essentially the businesses are often not
particularly sophisticated in terms
of making complicated things or building
products that are very hard to do with many different steps.
If you have zero machines, that limits greatly what
you can actually do.
So often, there are few specialized skills required.
Anybody, essentially, can work in a shop in some ways,
as long as you know some math.
And often, as we already said, the businesses
are not particularly innovative or creative.
In some ways, they're doing very simple things
that everybody else in the neighborhood
is also doing in some way or similarly.
Julie had a question.
STUDENT: So [INAUDIBLE] have this idea
that, with opportunities, all the poor could start businesses
and start doing better.
So I guess I'm wondering who's doing worse?
Is it zero-sum?
Are customers doing worse or something, but then
they wouldn't buy if they're doing worse--
PROFESSOR: Doing worse because of what?
STUDENT: Like, where is money coming from?
PROFESSOR: Say that again.
STUDENT: So if, in his idea, all the entrepreneurs are doing
better, who's doing worse?
PROFESSOR: So I think the idea is it's not zero-sum,
and the idea being, essentially, you
give money-- so suppose you give money to a person
and help them be an entrepreneur, like buying
machines or the like.
That entrepreneur is going to offer new products,
buy new machines, hire other people.
Then people purchase their products.
The other people who are hired, essentially, also purchasing.
So there's, essentially, a multiplier.
Everybody, at the end of the day, spillovers to other people
because, essentially, the entrepreneur
is going to be hiring people, creating new products,
consumers are better off because they like the new products,
and so on.
But I think the counterfactual is mostly about--
he was essentially saying we shouldn't do charity.
We shouldn't just give people money.
And actually, our case on Monday will be exactly about that.
It's like, should you do GiveDirectly,
our old friend that we already know from previous cases?
Should you just give people cash?
Or should you try to be more involved things that
help people doing at least some form of businesses?
And he's essentially saying charity is bad.
You shouldn't just give people money.
Instead, help them be entrepreneur, the reason
being that, A, this has sustained effects
on people over time.
So once you have a business you can grow
and then, at some point, you will not
need any charity anymore.
And second, it benefits other people
because once I have a big business,
I'm going to hire lots of people.
I'm going to pay them well, and they're
going to purchase other things.
And that helps other entrepreneurs, and so on.
That's kind of the fiscal or other type of multiplier people
call that.