PROFESSOR: The cost benefit analysis
has actually two key issues.
The first one is costs.
We talked about this already.
It's really, really, really expensive.
That's a lot of money for somebody
who earns like $1 a day, spending like $2,000 on a goat
and other types of things.
That's very expensive.
Because, again, the outside option
is just giving people that money directly.
So you have to justify that with relatively long returns.
And so here, for example, it's only worth
it if the benefits persist long into the future.
And Bandiera et al, after four years, consumption is about 11%
higher.
So in the cost benefit analysis, they
assume that consumption increases last until year 20.
And then likely it's going to be profitable to do so.
Of course, it depends also a little bit
on your interest rate.
What would you do with the money in terms of if you just put
the money into a bank account?
If you get really high interest rates,
that's a better idea than if it's not.
So the depreciation rate of benefits turns out to be key.
As I said, here, if anything, the benefits
increase over time.
So it's sort of negative depreciation.
It's actually getting better over time.
So likely, that's worth doing.
The second part, and this is our friend
that we get back to from the beginning of the lecture,
these programs have highly heterogeneous returns.
So what you can do is you can look at quantile treatment
effects.
So say you essentially find some way of ordering people
into people who have the least benefits all the way
until all the people have the most benefits,
and look at whatever the returns for those people.
And that's sort of complicated, and don't
want to get too much into this.
But what you essentially see here is on the y-axis
is people's treatment effects.
And on the x-axis is sort of like organizing people
into different groups and looking
at the people who benefit or likely benefit
are going to be on the right.
The people who benefit the least are going to be on the left.
Now that's not always monotonically
strictly increasing, because there's also noise in the data.
But by and large, what you should see is that on the right
people benefit more than on the left,
if they're sort of heterogeneous treatment effects.
That's to say, if there's some people who
benefit a lot more than others, this curve
should be increasing.
If everybody benefits the same, this curve
should be essentially flat.
If everybody had the same benefits
and would do exactly the same, you should see this curve
being flat.
But what you see is by and large that this curve is really
sort of increasing, in particular for things
like productive assets, in particular
for household assets, but also for consumption expenditures.
This effect here is about close to 100.
Of course, it gets noisy.
And here it's like essentially close to zero,
essentially there are some people--
you see the confidence interval sort of includes
zero, which essentially is to say we can't reject,
we can't say for sure that there's no effect.
It could just be by chance that this is a little bit higher
than zero because the confidence interval, sort
of the uncertainty is large enough that we can't really
say this is a positive effect.
In contrast, here it seems to be clearly people are benefiting.
People have clearly higher assets and so on.
So that's to say, in these types of programs, some people
benefit a lot more than others.
Now if you could just figure out who these people are
and identify those people directly,
maybe what we should be doing is provide
these assets and this type of program
to those types of people.
And then for the remaining ones, perhaps we're going to say,
here's cash or other types of support.
And that would be a better use of everybody's money
because the people of high returns
would essentially invest and get the benefits
of this program, the large benefits of the program
for them.
While everybody else who doesn't have these large returns
would just get other types of consumption benefit.
But the crucial part, of course, now
is to try to figure out how do we identify the people
with the highest returns?
Now how would you find out who has the highest returns?

You come to a village, where you have done this program before--
in a village or different places.
You have your data.
Now how do you figure out who are the people
with the high returns?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Just ask people.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we learned about this a little bit already.
This is what I mentioned before from [? Esther, ?]
you can just ask people.
Now what are the problems or what
are the good and bad things about asking people?
STUDENT: Like local people and villages
will have insights that you don't know about,
the people of village.
But they're also not necessarily financial experts.
So they might think that some indicator
of someone being a good businessman
isn't actually that helpful.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So they have a lot more information than I would have,
because they've lived there all their life.
My neighbor kind of knows whether I
would run a good or bad business from just interacting with me.
Maybe run a business before.
Maybe you have seen me do stuff.
You kind of know people in your neighborhood,
in particular, in these types of villages.
Now you're saying-- exactly right.
People might not necessarily have the right calculation
to use the right metric in terms of-- you're
interested in profits or increases
in consumption in the long run, but that might not necessarily
be what people are picking up when they look at,
does your neighbor seem competent in doing stuff.
Kyle.
STUDENT: They also might be biased [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: And why might they be biased?
STUDENT: They might think is better [INAUDIBLE]..

PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the crucial issue potentially is that, if you ask me,
you have a bunch of money, you are like great program
that you could give to people.
You come to my village and ask, who's
going to be the best entrepreneur?
I'm going to say, I'm going to be amazing.
I'm the best entrepreneur in the village.
You should give me the money.
Now everybody will say that potentially.
And if they don't say that, they might
say their uncle, or their sister,
or their son are really amazing entrepreneurs, or their friends
potentially.
So the issue is essentially incentives in the sense
that if you know that this information will
be used in certain ways later for the allocation of assets,
or this program or money in general, then
people will bias their responses towards themselves potentially.
You could say maybe you can't pick yourself
or the like, but also towards people in their family
and friends and so on.
That's right.
Any other concerns or things or issues?
Now, what do we do about that?

Yeah.
STUDENT: You have to get them to tell you the truth.
So somehow [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So there's essentially ways in which
you can do that in that sort of complicated methods
that don't want to get into.
But essentially, you want to incentivize people.
And the way you might be able to do that is
there's a complicated thing that Drazen Prelec and co-authors--
Drazen Prelec is at MIT Sloan--
has come up a few years ago.
And that essentially is called the Bayesian truth serum,
that essentially is a way to incentivize you in ways that
use everybody else's responses.
And it's sort of an incentive-compatible thing.
That's really hard to understand,
and I'm not sure I understand it.
But essentially, the bottom line from that
is that's an incentive-compatible way
of asking people.
And so the best thing for you in those types of incentives
is to essentially try to tell the truth.
And so what this paper was then trying to,
or the next paper I'm going to tell you,
was essentially trying to do that.
So one thing you could do is ask people in the community.
Another thing, you can essentially
do subgroup analysis.
In some sense you can say, look at women versus men
and old people versus young people,
and different types of businesses, and so on.
You can just essentially try to see, do certain covariates
to certain demographic or other characteristics
of the people in your sample that you have in treatment
and control.
Do those covariates predict whether people
have high returns?
And for that, you don't need to ask people.
You just use your data.
You can go back here and say, look,
we have here some people who have really high returns.
Some people have really low returns.
What are the characteristics of the people
with really high returns?
People to the really low returns?
And we could use that.
