PROFESSOR: Now, of course, the COVID-19 pandemic arrived.
And that was a huge setback.
Now I don't need to tell you who we are in high school
during COVID-19 that it was a huge setback.
But for people in poor countries,
it was such a worse setback than for us.
So of course, there was enormous health impact of the COVID-19
pandemic across the world.
What is remarkable though is that if you look at the impact,
the pure health impact on the poor countries,
with the exception of India that got
hit by a really horrendous delta wave,
many of the poor countries didn't suffer much more
from COVID-19 than richer countries.
And in fact, in Africa, the number
of deaths or cases of COVID-19 are surprisingly low.
I'm saying surprisingly because nobody has fully
understood why to my knowledge to fully
but it's something that people are working on.
So Africa has relatively low COVID.
India is in the high mark.
The rest of the developing countries
are across the spectrum.
But from a health perspective, the COVID-19 pandemic
was really worldwide and didn't affect
the poor countries worse.
However, the economic shock was actually much worse
in the poor countries.
Why?
Because when economic activity suddenly
shut down in the spring of 2020, in the rich countries
there was the fiscal power to do what it takes
to protect their citizens.

So the rich countries spent about 24% of their GDP
on fiscal stimulus measures.
Let me take a pause for a second.
What's a fiscal stimulus measure in plain English?
Yeah.
STUDENT: It's when the government puts money
into the economy so that people will spend more money
and get that cash flow between people.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So what's an example of a fiscal stimulus measure that was
taken in the US, for example?

STUDENT: The PPP loans that governments were handing out
to small businesses.
PROFESSOR: That's an example.
Absolutely.
Another one?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Stimulus checks.
PROFESSOR: Stimulus check.
Exactly.
A third one is--
go ahead.
STUDENT: Government spending on the research for life-saving--
PROFESSOR: Yes, absolutely.
That also counts as stimulus.
Yeah.
STUDENT: I think they gave money to the airline industries
in some--
PROFESSOR: Right.
So that's along the line of PPP loan, business support.
Another way to get money straight
into the hands of the people, it was quite contested
for a while.

So there was stimulus check and then there was another big one.

Unemployment.
Extended unemployment insurance.
So at the beginning of COVID, unemployment insurance
was given at a much higher level than before.
So in most states, people could make much more money being
unemployed than being employed.
That lasted for a while, then that stopped.
But that really protected people.
As a result, in the US, there was actually
a reduction of absolute poverty, the US poverty line.
There was a reduction of the number of people in poverty
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
In Europe, similarly.
In Europe, what governments did is that they paid businesses
to keep people employed.
So that amounted to 24% of GDP.
The consequences of that is that, in Europe
and in the US, as soon as economies could reopen,
people basically roared back into their various activities.
There wasn't a very slow coming back to life.
In fact, things pretty much overheated,
which was one of the reasons for inflation and so on.
But unemployment rate is extraordinarily
low by historical standards in the US and similarly in Europe.
So there was no--
basically, people were protected during the pandemic
and there was no time wasted in restarting
once the pandemic was over.
Now in the poorer countries-- so how could rich countries
finance this effort?
STUDENT: Taxes?
PROFESSOR: Did the taxes increase during the COVID-19
pandemic in the US?

Not really.
STUDENT: Debt?
PROFESSOR: Debt.
Exactly.
They could go borrow.
And in fact, the phrase that was used in France
was whatever it takes.
So they could borrow and they borrowed trillions
of dollars literally, which was the right thing
to do because if they had not sent trillions of money,
people would have gotten into deep problem
and they would have spent a lot more money to get them out
of the problem later.
So it made a lot of sense.
But it relies on this ability to go and borrow
from their citizens or from the general market.
The poor countries didn't have this ability.
So while the rich countries were spending
24% of their GDP on stimulus measures,
the poor countries spent 2% of their GDP
on stimulus measures, the poorest countries,
2% of a much smaller GDP so very little money.
And the consequence was that can just
invert everything you said and say this didn't
happen in poor countries.
So there was no research targeted to COVID
that is relevant to the poor countries.
There was no way to keep the schools open.
They were the first to close and they never
reopened for two years.
There was no money to support businesses.
And a lot of them collapsed.
There was no money for people to support
people who lost their job.
And in India, within days of the confinement, millions of people
found themselves in the streets to go home.
So they didn't have this ability to protect themselves.
And so as a result, a lot of people fell into poverty.
These were the projection of poverty reduction pre-COVID.
And this is what happened during COVID.
It's kind of nowcasting because we don't have
the official data for 2020 yet.
But that's the assumption that we
move from it would have been about 621
million people in poverty.
We move to 740 million in poverty.
And then what we don't really know
is what's going to happen in the future,
how quickly is it going to fall back.
Can we converge or are we going to really-- do
we have a permanent slowdown?
Of course, it's not helped now by the fact
that the prices of food have increased
and that mechanically increased poverty
because food is such an important part of the budget
for people in poor countries.
So this is something that we don't know.
That's something that I cannot project for you what's going
to happen in the future.
Economists are anyway terrible about predicting the future.
So if anybody makes a projection, don't believe them.
But it's certainly a challenge.
And the more you guys understand what people face,
what difficulties they face in their ordinary life
from having little money and from being poor,
the more equipped you will be in thinking
about how we can act as a world or in rich countries moving
forward.
The world has found it remarkably difficult
to share global public goods.
So once vaccinations were available,
it really stood to reason that we should share the vaccines.
First of all, it's kind of the ethically
the right thing to do.
Second of all, because this was such a worldwide pandemic,
any increase in the pandemic somewhere
would have what consequence?

If there is an increase somewhere,
what happens to us several months
later or several weeks later?
Yeah.
STUDENT: Comes back to other countries.
PROFESSOR: It comes back to other countries.
A very obvious example was the Delta wave in India.
The US thought they were out of the dog days of the pandemic.
And then the Delta wave happened in India.
And by the summer, it was in the US.
And it caused so many deaths.
So it was just even if no one-- if someone
didn't care at all about what's happening
in other countries, which is a weird thing
to think in any case, it was clear that we are one world.
And yet so countries got together
to create a fund which would have allowed people
to countries to buy--
which would have bought vaccines for the poor countries.
It's called the COVAX fund.
Countries put money in the COVAX fund
but then they immediately bought all the vaccine
doses available such that the COVAX fund had nothing to buy.
And that went on for months during the pandemic,
although that's now getting solved
because there are many more vaccine doses available.
But that was a big issue at the beginning of the pandemic.
So one of the things we have to think about
is how do we as a world manage global public good.
The next one that comes immediately
on the heel of COVID and it was made painfully obvious
this summer by the catastrophic weather events
is climate change, which is produced
at the level of the world because the CO2 emission
in China or in the US affects the life of people
in Africa or in South America.
But where the consequences in terms of everyday lives
are particularly acute for people in poor countries
who live in places where it's already hot.
So the impact of any one more degree
is higher when you start from a higher level.
And in addition, live with places
which, as we saw in the previous slides,
have just less resources and ability to protect themselves
of shocks.
So the bottom line is that a ton of progress was made.
Through a combination of international efforts,
for example, the spread of antibiotics,
the spread of new agricultural varieties that
are more productive, the spread of technology
also like the telephone, for example,
tremendous amount of progress was made.
Through this combination of collective action,
as well as effective government action
in the poor countries themselves,
but this progress is kind of not without fragility
due to the big crisis that can hit the world at one
point or another, COVID being an example, the war in Ukraine
being the current one, and the climate change
is being the next one.
And so to the extent you get prepared,
think about what are going to be the implications for others who
live lives that are less privileged than ours,
to what extent--
how can these countries prepare, mitigate, and adapt
this crisis?
And what are the type of actions that also rich countries can
take in helping them?
Then you can be a big part of the solution.

So if you want more on this, and I hope you want more,
you can look at various sources of data that help you visualize
some of these data.
So Gapminder has lots of tools.
Hans Rosling, who has now passed away,
is the one that put it together.
And he describes some of these data.
Our World in Data is a continuing evolving source.
A lot of the graphs that we presented today
come from Our World in Data.
They are putting together a lot of data that exists.
And it's very interesting stuff.