
PROFESSOR: So I want to finish the substantive part
of the class before we get into some logistic issue for today.
Talking about just one person.
And this person, it's a long time ago.
It's 1983.
So I don't think-- it's not current event
I'm talking about.
But it's from a book called A Quiet Violence
by two journalists who--
economist journalists who live in rural Bangladesh
in the '70s, particularly a difficult time in Bangladesh.
So think of a very, very poor place.
And things have gotten much better since.
So it's a story of one peasant family.
The story is on Canvas.
Please read it by yourself when you go home.
The first visit, Abu is sick.
He has not been able to work for the past three weeks
because he is sick and his six children are hungry.

The only person who is earning any money in the family
is his oldest, [INAUDIBLE],, a daughter who is still a child,
maybe 8 or 10.
She gets a quarter of kilo of rice for husking rice all day.
Husking is you take the rice.
The rice, it goes inside a little pocket
and you need to shake it to remove the husk.
So she does that and she gets a quarter of kilo of rice.
Although he's sick, he hasn't gone to the doctor
because it cost money, 100 takas, and he doesn't have it.
So that's their first visit.
And then they strike up a conversation
to try and understand how he arrived to this situation.
And he explained that, in fact, he
used to come from a relatively comfortable, not super
comfortable but somewhat comfortable
farming family who had enough land to live on.
But his mother got sick, so he sold some of the land
to buy medicine for his mother.
And then she died anyway.

Then the land was divided and they had a number of children.
So the land that they had that was left to them
was not longer enough.
It was no longer sufficient to feed everyone.
So they took some loans when they didn't have enough food
from a money lender, and the rate of interest was very high.
So to supplement his income from the land, from his own land,
and to reimburse these loans and to manage
the everyday expenses, he started working
for a landlord for a wage.
But the wage is 1 million a kilo of 25 of rice a day.
So not a lot of rice for his whole family.

He could make more money if he was a sharecropper.
But when you're a sharecropper, you basically
take full responsibility of a patch of land.
You do the entire harvest and then
you give half to the landlord.
And the problem with that is that only comes after--
you only get money after the harvest is done.
And you need to pay for the inputs and so on.
So it wasn't able to do sharecropping.
And at least when you work for a wage, you're paid immediately.
But this is a very low wage.
So it's not enough.
So he got more money by mortgaging some of his land
to the landlord.
So the landlord gave him money in exchange of putting
his land as collateral.
And that is where they were.
At this point, there still was optimistic
because he had planted a jackfruit tree four years ago.
Do you know what a jackfruit is?

Do you know what a jackfruit is?
It's kind of like durian but not really.
It's spiky.
Yeah.
It's a spiky thing, big-ish, and you make it curry with it
and it's very nice.
Plants a jackfruit.
A jackfruit tree with many jackfruit.
Not as odorant as durian and it's more caloric which
feeds more people.
So his idea is that in a couple of years,
the jackfruit tree will yield fruits
and then he'll be able to sell the fruit
and get good money from it.
So that's his plan for the future.
A few months later, they come back.
Finally, Abu had sold land to pay the doctor.
His wife doesn't have any work.
In the lean season, he can also not find work,
although he's not sick anymore.
So they are starving.
So he decides to cut down the jackfruit tree
and he sells the wood for 25 takas.
And it never got any fruit.



True or False? Determining whether somebody is below the poverty line requires measuring their income.



True.

False.

Why is it important to adjust income using Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) numbers?



Because some countries are more expensive to live in than others.

Because each country’s government sets its own poverty line.

Because exchange rates are too volatile.


Select all that apply. On average, people in poor countries have…



Higher child mortality rate

Lower life expectancy

Fewer years of education

Lower PPP-adjusted income

True or false? Since 1950, due to worsening inequality the gap in life expectancy between rich and poor countries has increased.



True

False


How did the COVID-19 pandemic impact poor countries differently than rich countries?



The health impacts were more severe in poor countries.

Poor countries were less able to finance fiscal stimulus measures.




