PROFESSOR: So then let's delve into the issue itself
and tell you about the magnitude of the problems.
Really when we say people are poor, what do we mean by this?
How poor are the poor?
And how do we measure how poor our country is?
This is not a rhetorical question.
I actually want to know from you.
How do we know how poor people are?
STUDENT: Sometimes you can measure GDP or GDP per capita.
PROFESSOR: What does that mean?
STUDENT: How much money does the country produce
versus how people we have.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So you take everything that's produced in a certain country
and you somehow add it all up in some ways.
And then you divide it by the number of people
who are in that country.
And that's then what people refer to as GDP per capita,
Gross Domestic Product per capita.
That tells you on average how much are
people producing in a country.
[INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] you can survive by yourself.
PROFESSOR: I see.
And so how do we measure that?
STUDENT: You just count how many people
can survive by themselves.
PROFESSOR: Right.
But suppose you wanted to ask me whether I
can survive by myself.
How do you do that?
What do you ask me?
STUDENT: I guess I don't know.
It's like if you were to remove all [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Anybody else want to elaborate on that
or have any other thoughts?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I think it's related.
There's a notion about the market basket of goods, things
across different countries that are considered
baseline necessities.
And then looking at the price of that in different countries
to compare.
PROFESSOR: Right.
You mentioned something very important,
which is how do we compare different goods
across different countries?
If I buy some food or if I buy some services,
if I get a haircut or whatever else,
that's going to be much more expensive, say, in the US
compared to other countries who are poorer.
And we're going to take that into account.
So it's not just about dollar exchange rates
but much more about how much do people actually
consume every single day.
And we need to sort take that into account.
But I want to get back to the question or the comment
from before where it was said that people
need enough to survive.
So anybody have any thoughts on how we
might be able to go about that?

Yeah.
STUDENT: I think there's a line of people
being absolutely poor.
It's like 1.25 USD per day as the daily income.
PROFESSOR: So there's an extreme poverty line,
as people call it, which is a minimum amount that people
think that people need to survive.
And what really that is is how much are people spending.
Mostly it's about covering basic needs.
In particular, food.
And this has been recently changed to $2.15.
It was $1.90 before that, which is an amount that essentially
people have tried to come up with a number which helps you
have the necessities for life.
In particular food and so on, excluding housing.
And so then you have this threshold.
And then how do you then figure out
whether somebody is above or below that threshold?
How can we figure that out?

STUDENT: Measure your income.
PROFESSOR: And how do you do that?
STUDENT: You could ask them how much money they make.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
You ask them questions.
Exactly.
So we ask people questions.
You can either measure people's income
and ask them what are all your income sources?
How much money do you or your family members
and so on earn through various ways?
That's not as simple as it sounds,
because often people are self employed.
People have a farm where they grow
maize or other types of things.
And so that's not as easy as it sounds.
But we can do that.
Any other ideas of what we could do?
So one idea would be to measure people's income.
What else could we do?

Yeah.
STUDENT: Average life expectancy.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So we can measure other aspects of people's lives.
But if we wanted to understand whether somebody
is above or below the poverty line,
we could measure how much money do they have or what else could
we do?
Yeah.
STUDENT: I guess you could see what
are those goods that they're able to obtain [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
Exactly right.
So we could also look at consumption.
We could just ask, how did how much money did you
spend on different things?
How much did you eat in particular?
How much did you spend for household goods?
How much did you spend on different categories?
And then we can try to add that up and see
how much is that per person.
So usually households are larger.
So you have to divide by the number of people.
And then you can say how much money
do people have per person.
That's exactly right.
And then there's lots of other aspects
of what does poverty entail in addition to not having money,
which we're going to including life expectancy, health
and so on, which we're going to return to in a second.
But that's exactly right.
OK, so now we want to measure how poor our country is.
So one measure that was sort of mentioned already
is the gross national income, which
is very much similar to GDP but somewhat different.
Does somebody know how that's different from GDP
by any chance?
So you said GDP, which is Gross Domestic Product, which
is everything that's produced in a country overall divided
by the number of people.
But I here have something else, which is the Gross National
Income, GNI.
What is that?
Yeah?
STUDENT: So GDP is the produce unit inside the country
and GNI is all the people, like the nationality.
PROFESSOR: Right.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: So one is about production
and the other one is about income.
So for example, so I'm from Germany.
If I were to earn some money or produce things here in the US
and send it back to Germany and people were then
receiving remittances, et cetera,
or if I'm counted just as a German citizen, which I still
am, then that would be part of the German income, not
necessarily the US one, even though things
are produced in the US.