Somebody previously was saying--
I was asking about monetary metrics.
I was asking about the poverty line.
I was asking about how much do people consume
or how much income do people have.
And are people above or below a certain threshold
in the poverty line?
But somebody was saying, well, poverty
is not just about income.
There are lots of other things difficult or different
for the poor.
And what are those things?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Accessibility, so even if you have money,
maybe it takes a lot more money to go somewhere to get a good--
PROFESSOR: Accessibility, as in like you mean like mobility,
or as in moving around, or just being able to buy things,
even if you have money?
STUDENT: Yeah, being able to buy things.
Like with food deserts.
PROFESSOR: I see, so access to food and other goods,
in particular, for example, in rural areas,
will be very hard to buy lots of things,
including food, but also technologies, and so on.
Even if you had money.
STUDENT: Access to a higher quality of goods and services,
a company selling organic goods, they may not put into our area.
PROFESSOR: This is very much related.
This is exactly right.
If you have high quality or a lot of new technologies, often,
they're targeted towards richer populations
because those are the people who have money that you can make
the most money often with goods that are
sold to people who are rich.
And as a result, of course, if you're poor,
it's going to be hard to buy these anyways because they're
expensive.
But even if you had more money or wanted to save a lot,
it would be hard perhaps because they might not even
be available in your area or your country.
OK, what else is different for the poor?
STUDENT: Education and--
PROFESSOR: Education-- say more?
STUDENT: Practical skills.
PROFESSOR: And what exactly-- what do you mean by education?
How would you measure this or how would you learn
about what we mean by that?
STUDENT: I'm not entirely sure, but maybe
just a basic math, basic reading in their own languages.
PROFESSOR: That's terrific.
So one measure is what do people learn or know?
So it would be basic reading, basic math, languages, and so
on.
So this is about just knowledge, what did you learn in school.
What other measures could be used
to learn about people's education?
Yeah?
What was that?
STUDENT: Time, a number of years.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, we could also
learn about years of education.
How many years did you spend in school
starting from primary school?
Did you go to school at all?
Did you complete primary school, secondary school?
Did you go to universities, and so on?
And usually, people use years of education
as sort of a summary measure of people's education overall.
And so then we have education quantity.
And then we have, in addition education quality,
it's like how much do people actually learn
conditional on being in school.
And educational quality might be a lot higher in some places
than in others.
And it's surely higher in rich countries
compared to in poor countries.
So you might even be in school but just not receive
a very good quality of education, which then will
be reflected in low knowledge of, say, basic reading
and writing skills, which we're going to talk about
in our class, as well as languages, math, and so on.
So we have education.
What else?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Might be living in more dangerous areas,
don't have access to clean water or sanitation.
They might not own their own houses
and might not have insurance or more vulnerable to this--
PROFESSOR: So you said four different things,
which I hope I can remember.
So one is physical safety.
So that's excellent.
Physical safety, and you might just not
be protected against theft, against violence, and so on.
Second, you said sanitation, just
being able to have clean water, for example,
not be exposed to pollution, and so on.
Then you said housing, people being
able to have their own housing, or just have any housing,
for that matter.
And I forgot the fourth thing, sorry.
STUDENT: Insurance.
PROFESSOR: And then finally, insurance and risk.
People are exposed to way more risk than others.
These are all excellent points and.
That's all correct.
Yes.
STUDENT: The types of jobs that they might find later.
So a richer country may have more people
working a corporate job.
Versus a poor country might have more people
working in physical labor.
PROFESSOR: That's exactly correct.
And that's in part a result of education.
If you have no education, it's hard to do a desk job,
for example, that involves a computer.
How are you going to do this if you don't
know how to read and write?
So there's a lot of physical jobs
and manual labor among the poor compared to more IT, tech
jobs, et cetera among richer populations who
are more educated.
So we talked about-- yeah?
STUDENT: Expanding on the insurance part,
maybe having access to good healthcare
or being able to afford the healthcare.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so say more.
STUDENT: I was going to say having access to healthcare
is important because it also influences
your day-to-day life in terms of if you're
able to get groceries, if you're able to go to school,
and things like that.
PROFESSOR: So you're saying healthcare,
it's also health itself.
So which is one, healthcare would be access to doctors,
access to medication, be that, for example, vaccination,
be that any types of medication in case people fall sick,
access to good hospitals, access to nurses, and so on.
So that's about healthcare.
And so you could measure them in terms
of how many doctors are in a country,
how many nurses are in a country, how many beds are
in hospital available close to you, and so on.
So that's one measure of quality and quantity of healthcare.
The second thing I think you were saying as well
is just health quality itself.
How good is your health?
This could be things like how likely are
you to get certain diseases?
It could be how likely are you to fall sick?
How likely are you to live beyond a certain age?
In particular, under five mortality,
for example, how many children live until age five,
what fraction of children lives until age five.
Could be life expectancy overall.
How old do people get, which is a very good summary of how
healthy people are overall.
And then as you said exactly, there's
also then quality of life.
If you're really sick and have a lot of diseases,
you might just have a lower quality of life
as a result of that, even if you're able to survive.
Anything else?

It's a pretty good list.
I think we covered most of the things that I mentioned.
We didn't quite talk about malnutrition.
We talked about this at the beginning, which
is just having enough food, which is very basic need.
Education and literacy we talked about.
We talked about child mortality and life expectancy at birth.
We talked less about happiness and mental health.
It turns out that being rich is very much
predictive of how happy you are or how happy you say you are,
at least.
It's also very much predictive of people's mental health.
So overall, richer people, compared to poorer people,
are happier and have better mental health.
For example, richer people are less
likely to be depressed, and anxious, and so on.
So that's a key difference between places,
on average, of course.
Then there's medical care.
We talked about health, as well as safety risk,
or safety nets and exposure to risks.
I want to just spend a couple of minutes.
So just pointing out how huge these differences are.
These differences are enormous.
For example, if you look at mortality rate of children
under age five, if you look at-- this
is in 2015, if you look at Somalia, this is about 12.7%.
So 12.7% of children do not reach age five.
While this is about 0.2% in Iceland.
This is a 60-fold difference.
So 60 times more likely to--
a child is 60 times more likely to die in Somalia compared
to Iceland.
Life expectancy at birth in Japan is about 84 years.
While in Sierra Leone, it's about 52.
That's a difference of about 32 years.
That on average, a person lives longer in Japan
compared to Sierra Leone.
When you look at mean schooling years,
it's 14.1 years in Germany.
Germans love school and go all to school.
Instead, it's about 1.5 years in Burkina Faso.
This is also in 2017.
Similarly, expected years of schooling on average income,
we already talked about.
So these differences are enormous.
These are staggering differences overall.
And there's lots of--
to be done to try and figure out,
well, what might be able to do to improve
the lives of the poor and sort of try to lower
some of these differences.
I'm going to stop here now and hand over
to Esther, who will tell you that some progress, at least,
has already been made.
So you might say things are terrible,
and what can we do, and throw up our hands in the air,
and be sad about it.
But in fact, lots of progress has already been made.
And we're going to study, and try and learn,
and how to perhaps do that or what
policies might be able to help.