FRANK SCHILBACH: Welcome to 1473.
This is the Challenge of World Poverty lecture number 1,
so if you're here for 1473, you're at the right place.
My name is Frank Schilbach and Esther
Duflo-- she's over there-- and I will be teaching this class.
We've been teaching this class for many years.
It's a lot of fun, and we hope to have a lot of fun
this semester as well.
OK.
Having said that, welcome again to 1473.
Let me just tell you what the plan is for today.
We're going to have first introductions.
We're going to tell you what this class is about overall.
We're going to tell you about the magnitude of the problem.
What is global poverty?
What do we mean by this?
And why is it an important issue?
We're going to tell you a little bit about progress.
We're going to tell you about a big problem,
but also there will be some progress to report.
And then more specifically, we're
going to tell you about one specific example of one
specific person--
Abu is his name-- who lives in Bangladesh,
to make the point that poverty is much
more than aggregate statistics.
It's about people's lives and individuals.
And we're going to learn a little bit
about the life of Abu then.
And then we're going to talk a little bit about admin
and logistics at the very end, where we're
going to tell you all sorts of important details
if you want to take the class.
OK.
So first, who are we?
First, we have Esther Duflo, who really
doesn't need any introduction.
I'll let you introduce herself anyway.
ESTHER DUFLO: Hi.
I am Esther Duflo.
I was a graduate student here, a PhD student in this department,
and I've been teaching here ever since.
And I've devoted my career and my life
to try to understand the lives of the poor
in developing countries with the objective develop--
to help developing countries think
about policies and programs that can make their lives better,
and we are going to see hopefully
a lot of that in the class.
And it's a pleasure to have you here.
FRANK SCHILBACH: Thank you.
And as I told you already, I'm Frank Schilbach.
I'm from Germany.
I'm an economist at MIT as well.
I teach development economics, which
is what this class is about, as well as behavioral economics,
which is about-- or psychology in economics, which
is trying to introduce or use insights from psychology
and other fields to better understand economic behavior.
In particular, I'm interested in the psychology
of the poor, which we're going to learn about towards the end
of the class.
Now, what is this class about?
What do we want you to take away and learn from this class?
The key goal is to understand poverty.
What do we mean by poverty?
What is it?
Who are the poor?
Where are they?
How are their lives going on?
And how can we be perhaps help tackle poverty and improve
people's lives?
That's the key goal of this class overall,
and that's what Esther and others have started studying
at MIT in other places.
We want you to give an introduction-- get
an introduction to this topic.
Second, we want you to help learn
to formulate coherent and interesting thoughts
about poverty, and in particular learn
to reason like an economist.
That means we want to think about costs and benefits
of different policies.
We want to think about how people make decisions,
why they choose to do certain things
or not to do certain things, and how potential policies might
be able to improve people's lives
through the lens of economics.
And then one key goal is since this is an introductory class
into economics, we want you to become excited or even more
excited about economics and learn
about what the field of economics is about.
