PROFESSOR: If you guys were alive in the last few years,
you might be tempted to think that the world is going to hell
in a hand basket very fast.
After all, you did most of your high school in COVID times.
And then as soon as we seem to more or less get
a little bit used to the COVID situation, the war in Ukraine
started.
And food prices increased.
And the energy prices increased.
And food prices increased-- in fact,
particularly costly for people in poor places
because a lot of their budget is on food.
But, in fact, I'm here to tell you
that if we take a slightly longer view, maybe
starting in the 1990s--
well, none of you were born, presumably.
Things have really looking been looking up
and up and up for the poorest people in the world.
It's not to say that there hasn't been crisis,
there hasn't been difficulties in our own countries,
for example, rising inequality, worry about climate change.
But if we take the perspective of the poorest
person in the world, maybe someone who
lives in Burundi or in Togo, there
has been tremendous increase in their quality of life,
hopefully with a big acceleration since 1990.
And I want you to keep that in mind
because that's going to be with us for the rest of this class,
finding the reasons for this increase
and finding whether we can leverage
on some of this improvement to get things even better
in years to come, despite the challenges
that we'll experience.
So starting with poverty, just in the number of people living
under $1.90 a day, there has been a tremendous fall
in the number of poor people.
Since the 1980's and roughly since 1990,
the number of poor people has been
divided by 2, the number of extremely poor people.

To be perfectly honest, a lot of these poor people
who are not that poor anymore lived in only two countries.
Do you know what these two countries are?
STUDENT: China?
PROFESSOR: China, and?
STUDENT: India.
PROFESSOR: India.
So a lot of the poverty reduction
in terms of number of people going right above poverty
is due to China and India for two reasons.
They were countries that started very poor,
so with a lot of people just below $1.90.
And they experienced fast growth.
So it's a big mass of people who could get out
of poverty in years to come.
When people like the World Bank, for example,
did poverty projection, which I'll show you in a minute,
they were predicting a slow-down of the decrease in poverty
simply because we are now reaching the point where
there is nobody really poor left in China and very few in India.
And then after that, further poverty reduction
will have to come, in particular from Africa,
where growth has been lower.
But nonetheless, it's still a very large number
of people who are not living in situations where, as one of you
put it very aptly, they don't have
enough to live by themselves.
If we look at other dimensions of quality of life,
obviously, being alive would count as a pretty
important one, one would say.
In 1800, the global average life expectancy was only 29 years.
And most of the map was in red, with people having
life expectancy below 40.
By 1950, things had improved, but pretty much exclusively
in the richer countries, so big improvement in Europe with life
expectancy 1950 in my home country,
France, of 66 years old, improvement in North America,
in Australia, and not at all in Africa, South Asia, and China
by 1975.
By 2015, the life expectancy has continued
to improve in the richer countries.
But the big story is how fast it has increased in the poorer
countries.
Look at India.
Today, India, in 2015 has a life expectancy of 68 years.
It is what it was in France when we looked
at the map a few years ago.
Even in Africa, we have life expectancy
of 62 years old in South Africa--
looking at the countries in East Africa, 65, 67.
So there is really an improvement
in life expectancy coming mainly from a big improvement in child
mortality.
Child mortality has really collapsed in poorer countries.
It has also declined actually everywhere.
But this is a place where we see what the economists like
to call convergence, which is from situations that are very
different, you converge towards something that
looks a little bit similar.
Of course, for child mortality, we
would like to see everyone converging towards zero.
But we are seeing now, kids, and this
is kids dying before the age of five, only Africa is above 5%.
But it's well below 10%.
And if we are lucky enough to extrapolate
to trend of child mortality in Africa, we'll also go below 5%
very soon.
And this is quite remarkable because Africa
is one continent where the decrease in poverty
has not been as high.
Growth in most of the countries in Africa has been slow.
So people haven't become much poorer
in terms of income poverty, in terms of how much goods
they are able to afford.
Their governments haven't been much richer either.
And yet, they managed to get this tremendous fall in poverty
due to--
well, that's what we'll have to find out in this class.
Due to what?
It's not from more money being available in total
in the countries.
But it's from a more targeted use
of the money to this problem, so a greater focus
on essential aspect of lives, the ones you guys
mentioned when we were discussing
what it is to be poor, health and education and nutrition,
more focus on this at the international level,
but very importantly within each and every
of the countries, even countries that remain super poor.
And because of this greater focus,
there's a greater pragmatism, I would say,
in adopting things that work.
So even in 1990, there was perhaps
in many countries, many poorer countries, more focus on,
oh, we need to grow.
We are going to become the next Taiwan or the next Hong
Kong or the next Sri Lanka through the mechanism
of a rapid economic growth.
And then now, it's not saying that there is not an ambition
of economic growth also.
But on top of that, there is, well, the first thing
we need to do is to make sure that our citizens are
alive to experience whatever growth comes.
And they are focused on simple things like safe conditions
for delivery for the mother, for the child, therapies
to fight HIV, building schools next to every home
so kids can go to school, and so on.
So in that sense, the year of 1990 to 2019,
development economists were the happiest
of the economists in terms of seeing a story that was mainly
a lot of progress to be made because we are starting
from such a worse situation to start with--
but on the other hand, fast progress.
