PROFESSOR: So all that suggests that there is evidence
that time inconsistency plays a role.
And maybe it also plays a role in explaining the low access
to preventive care.
However, I'm not sure that it's the entire explanation
for immunization.
Because immunization-- consider the case
of incentive for not being [INAUDIBLE]..
You see people being very rational when they really
think about it because they understand that they need
something to pressure them enough to say,
I'm going to tie my hands even if it costs me money,
and it's worth it.
So we have people who are very human-- fundamentally
human-- in having this tension between the present
and the future, but who are also smart about it.
Right?
But if people are smart about it,
they should realize that for six months
they have not immunized their kids.
They should realize that they are doing the same thing
every month of saying, oh, next week I will do it,
and then next week I will do it, and then next week I
will do it.
So they should realize that they have
this hyperbolic discounting problem,
and they should be able to overcome it
once they realize it's there.
For example, find a friend who forced them to do it
or decide to bite the bullet and do it anyways.
So it seems a little bit unlikely to think
that it is-- if the benefits are really that
high-- the perceived benefits are really
that high of incentive-- that they keep fooling themselves
again and again and again.
And therefore, it's probably not the entire explanation
for low immunization or low deworming
or low access to chlorine tablets.
So maybe another part of the explanation is that people--
even though the benefits are actually high,
the perceived benefits are not that high.
And that may have something to do
with understanding of health.

One thing that suggests that it might be going on
is the big contrast that we find between preventive care
and curative care.
In Udaipur-- you will see the movie a week from now,
the movie about Udaipur health system--
that movie going back to the date
is about 10 years old, 15 years old.
But it doesn't dramatically change.
You will see that people do spend a lot of money
on their health about 7% of their budget
is spent on health.
And they receive a lot of care, but most of this care
is in response to an actual crisis.
So for somethings they get traditional medicine.
For some things they actually go to the different types
of doctors--
I'll describe whom in a minute-- where they get shots, drips,
pills, et cetera.
So people seem to be not doing immunization.
For example, people will not immunize their kids
against measles.
But if the kids have measles, they
will do whatever they can to get the child better.
So what is the difference between preventive and curative
care that can explain this difference?
Yeah.
STUDENT: The effects of preventative care
aren't really that visible.
Like, curative care is very visible.
It's kind of like one goes from not having it to not having it,
and the other goes from having it to not having it.
So that [INAUDIBLE] [? visibility ?]
I think [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yes.
Liam.
STUDENT: I was going to say the same thing.
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
And there is one more problem.
Angela.
STUDENT: So it's unbearable for humans to be ill
and to know that they're doing nothing about it.
So if you want to prevent, then you
could potentially have it, not have it.
You don't see the benefit in the short run.
But also, in terms of hope and just wanting to get better,
it's unbearable to be ill and to know that you're doing nothing
about it.
So you're ready to pay any price.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So there are three things I think.
One is what you're saying, which is
it's much easier to see that something--
that there is a difference.
The other two are in Angela's comment.
The first one is the present--
it's going back to hyperbolic discounting--
is that with vaccination I'm avoiding a problem sometime
in the future.
And it's in a long time from now,
so it's not as present to me as something that's
happening right now.
And then there is this idea of what
we call loss aversion, which is you hate not doing something
about something.
So you are confronted with a situation which you could maybe
fix or you could do something to make better,
you feel that you have to do it.
So these three things could be going on.
Let's spend a bit of time on the first one,
which is the difference in the visibility of the action.
So another feature of most diseases
is that they just get better.
And take the flu for example.
Typically, it gets better.
So suppose that you think that--
suppose that you start from the belief
that you need to do something because you have this loss
aversion frame and you think you have to act.
So you have the flu, and you say, I have to do something.
And someone tells you, well, there
is this ivermectin treatment that really helps for the flu.
Ivermectin is the de-worming medicine
that was fashionable against COVID at some point.
And you feel, oh, I have to get the ivermectin vaccine.
You take it, and mostly you get better.
Even in COVID, mostly you get better.
And so, then you feel, wow, this ivermectin thing,
it really worked.
So your belief is further reinforced
that ivermectin works.
So similarly, for antibiotic in India--
in India, anybody-- someone is sick,
they want antibiotic and steroid shot.
And they get better, because mostly you
get better, even if the antibiotic had
nothing to do with it.
But they keep accumulating experiences that it got better.
And so, you never really are able to learn
that it is not what happened.
It just got better anyways.
So any diseases that are a cyclical pattern
or gets better on its own will be
likely to generate this kind of fake cure where anything works.
So that's the danger with a large subsidy
of antibiotics and other drugs.
For example, there is a relatively new now--
it's not that new anymore--
medicine against malaria called artemisinin combination therapy
that comes from a plant that grows in China.
The medicine was discovered in China about 15 years ago,
and it has been a game changer for malaria around the world.
And the idea is that, OK, now, we really need
to subsidize the access to the treatment, which in a way
is great.
But on the other hand, because there is so much overtreatment
of malaria-looking things that has
led to the overuse of artemisinin combination
therapy.
Which leads to the establishment of resistance.
Let me give you an example from a study
by Pascaline Dupas, Jessica Cohen, and Simone Schaner.
So it's a study on Artemisinin Combination Therapy or ACT.
They start with the same--
they subsidize it with a voucher in a randomized experiment.
The subsidy could be 0 or 92%.
So without subsidy, 20% of self-diagnosed malaria episodes
get ACT.
With subsidy, 50% do so.
But the thing is that many of the self-diagnosed episodes
are not malaria.
So the subsidy has one good effect,
which is more people who have malaria take the medicine.
But it has one bad effect, which is more people who do not have
malaria also take the medicine.
So that's not a problem we have with subsidizing
preventive care because attention is not there.
Everybody should get immunized.
But with malaria, people who do not have malaria
should not take this medicine.
It has negative externality on the rest of us because
of resistance build up.
So one possible solution is to lower the subsidy.
And in fact, they find that if you
have a subsidy that's not 92% but closer to 80%,
that reduces overtreatment.
So it reduces the people who think they might have malaria
but in fact don't.
Those are the people who are least likely to take--
most responsive, perhaps because they understand it's not sure.
Whereas the people who in fact have malaria,
they are so sick that they are not misled,
and they take it even if it's a little bit more expensive.
So that's lower the subsidy.
The other option is testing.

So as part of this experiment as well,
they are offering a free testing for malaria, also at the shop.
So you can decide to test when you think you have
malaria before taking the drug.
And the problem is the compliance with the test.
So if the test is positive, everybody complies.
That is they all take the drug.
But it's the test is negative, many people
take the drug anyway.
The compliance rate, which is not
taking the drug because you don't have malaria,
is 25% when there is a 92% subsidy
level, 40% with a subsidy level of 88%,
and 42% with a subsidy level of 80%.
So people basically take the test,
figure out that they are negative,
and take the malaria medicine anyway.
So why would they do that?
STUDENT: Well, in a way you're there-- you went there already.
The test is already [INAUDIBLE],, so you might as well take it.
It might help in the future.
So you convince yourself that once you've made it there
and it's subsidized--
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
So maybe you've paid part of the cost by just going.
The test itself is free, but you've gone
you've gone to the shop and--
but that's still need to pay one more cost.
So why pay for something that you don't need?

Yeah.
STUDENT: It could be a caution thing.
Like, oh I got a negative test, but it could still be it.
So I want to take it just in case.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
We've become so familiar with that.
You test yourself for COVID, and you're like, well, whatever.
It may or may not be good.
So they are worried that the test is a false negative.
And they have a reason to be worried
because even though this particular test is very
reliable, the test that is available usually
in the hospital they go to is very unreliable.
It's full of type II and type I error.
So people test positive when they
don't have malaria and test negative
when they do have malaria.
And so, the trust in the health system is low.
And therefore, even when you introduce this new technology,
people are not necessarily believing that-- believing you
with the new technology.
So the trust interferes with people's ability
to learn about what is effective treatment for them
at this very specific point in time.
Julie.
STUDENT: Oh yeah.
I was just going to say that maybe another thing
on the subsidy on the negative side
is maybe their friend took the medicine and they healed.
PROFESSOR: Yes, yes.
So this goes, of course, against--
the one reason why you might not trust the result of the test
is that the result of the test goes
against the wealth of experience you've
had from your own past experience, your friends,
and all that.
And you might not fully believe.