PROFESSOR: So there is one paper that's-- actually,
it's a series of paper now-- that explores that
in the context of deworming.
So why would we study deworming to think about nutrition?
That's not a nutrition intervention,
it's a health intervention.
So why would it be a good way to look at nutrition?
Angela?
STUDENT: So whether children have deworming or not,
it impacts their ability to absorb the nutrients
and micronutrients in food.
So if they have worms, [INAUDIBLE]..

PROFESSOR: One can think-- precisely-- one
can think about the worms as basically
competing for the nutrient with the child.
That's maybe not the best conversation
to have at 1:00 in the afternoon.
But so, basically, a child, by removing the worms
from a child, I am making more nutrition
available for this child.
And, in fact, deworming has long been
suggested that it could be a good way
to reduce anemia in children, improve nutrition in children.
So, in 1999, there was a study by Edward Miguel
and Michael Kremer--
Michael Kremer, who got the Nobel Prize in 2019.
One of his seminal studies is precisely
this one, so of studying this 1999 intervention.
The study was undertaken in the short run to look at-- before
the control group was treated--
to look at the impact of the deworming program on school
participation.
And then, so we're going to quickly look at that.
But then, even more relevant for us,
to look at the long-term nutrition and health
impact of deworming, they looked at them-- at the same kids
again in 2016 and 2021 where they are now adults
10 years later and then 20 years later, they are looked again.
They were able to follow 7,500 kids who
were in school at the time of the deworming program.
By that time, they all have been dewormed.
But some kids benefited from deworming for three years
and some kids for just one.
So this is going to be the difference.
We are really going to compare less deworming versus more.
So in the original program, the decision
was taken to randomize at the school level.
And the schools were assigned in these three groups.
The first group received deworming program starting
in 1998, the second group in 1999,
and the last group in 2001.
So in the long-term impact--
in the short-term impact is going
to-- there are going to be able to compare group one to group
two and three, and group one and two to group three.
And for the long-term impact, they
are going to pool together one and two, which they are going
to compare to group three.
Why do we randomize at the school level?

Yes.
STUDENT: If you randomize them in the individual level,
then they won't infect other students in the school.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So this is a discussion we had when
we talked about randomization.
When you randomize at the individual level,
the kids who have not been treated
could reinfect the kids who have been treated.
And, also, the kids who have been treated, in some sense,
help the kids who have not been treated
because they have fewer worms.
And worms are extremely contagious.
So when you have a contagious disease like that,
you cannot randomize at the individual level.
You have to randomize the whole group.
You have to treat the whole group in order
to make sure that you capture the full effect.
Otherwise, basically, your treatment and control
will even out by sharing their worms.
So that's the reason to randomize at the school level.
That raises a problem, which is, suppose that you now
wanted to do this experiment.
Could you take three large schools
and randomize one school in group one,
one school in group two, and one school in group three?

Even if they were-- you had thousands-- suppose
you go to big schools and you have
thousands of kids in each school,
but you have only three schools.

Yes.
STUDENT: No, because then there could be
some factors within the school.
And so, you're not averaging over many schools [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So [? Vaishnavi ?] said, the problem you have
is that if you randomize only three schools, even
though on average there should be the same because you've
randomized them, there could be something
different about the school.
For example, they are in a different geography.
In one of them, thunder struck, so you
have the school is broken.
In one of them the director is better and so on.
So if you randomize at the school level,
even if you have many kids within a school,
you have to think about many schools.
Cut a long story short, roughly the level of randomization
is your number of effective observation.

So what are the results?
Well, in the short run, when they compare the treated
to the untreated school, they found a first direct effect
on anemia and on weight.
So it seems that there was a first order
effect on nutrition.
And there was also an effect on absenteeism.
So 25% reduction in absenteeism.
So kids spend more time in school
because they were sick less.
So that's the short-term effect.
In the long run--
and so, these are the results-- the effect
for 2016, so about 10 years after the treatment.
You can see how the effect worked by comparing treatment
to control.
So these are distribution densities.
So this is basically the fraction of people
that you see at each of these levels,
if you will remember from your probability and statistics
class in high school or here.
So if I look, for example, at this one, what
happened to the distribution of the working hours
for the treatment group compared to the control
school among the boys?

So you want to look at the graph that is at the top left corner.

Yes, Claire.
STUDENT: The treatment shifted the curve towards the right,
indicating that there are more hours worked in the treatment
group compared to the control group?
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
What we see in the treatment group
is that the treatment distribution
moves to the right.
So there are more of the hour-- more of the larger hours
are observed.
This is how you want to read a density, which
is, you're more likely to see this higher hours worked
in the treatment group compared to the control group.
So they worked more.
We also see a shift to the right of the log earnings function.
So they are also earning a little more.
Similarly, for the women, you see
there are a lot of women who just are working very little.
But you start seeing a bump of women,
you start seeing more chances for girls
to be working some meaningful hours in the treatment group.
And you're seeing the earning curve also shifting
to the right.
So you're more likely to observe larger earnings
in the treatment group.
So it looks like we are looking 10 years later.
And these kids who were dewormed three years instead of one
have earnings that are larger.
And they are more likely to work.
Yeah.
STUDENT: How do you think about statistical significance
for these graphs?
PROFESSOR: Oh, yes.
So nothing about this graph tells us
anything about statistical significance.
So that's a great question.
So to do statistical significance,
well, we could test that.
They are tests for statistical significance
of an entire distribution.
So, for example, first order stochastic dominance.
But you can also say, well, let me compare means.
And let me see whether the means of the two distribution
are statistically significantly different.
And this is exactly what we find--
what we see in this table-- what we examine in this table.
So, actually, this table also combine the 2016 follow-up
and the 2021 follow-up.
So this is looking somewhere between 10 and 20 years
after people have been treated.
We can now compare--
so each of these number coefficients-- number lambda,
each of the number in the column is the difference
between treatment and control along with the standard error
of this difference.
So we can now answer--
in parentheses, so the coefficient
that's not in parentheses, for example,
the 0.09 here is the difference between treatment and control
or between dewormed three years or two years versus one.
And in parentheses below is the standard error.
So now we can answer your question
of how we think about statistical significance.
Do you know how to tell us whether this difference is
statistically-- what we need to do
to know whether this difference is statistically significant
or not?
STUDENT: Yeah.
I'd have to look at the equations again.
But it's, you subtract them and square them in some way.
PROFESSOR: So, yeah it's done-- it's even simpler than that.
In this case, you basically divide one by the other.
I'm giving you the formula.
But you will have to-- as Javier said,
you will have to go back to your statistics course
to remember why it's true.
You want to divide one by the other.
If this ratio is greater than two,
it's significant at 5% level of confidence.
This means, there is only a 5% chance
that you think it's different-- that you
have found that it's different from zero,
but, in fact, it is not.
So there are only 5% chance of a--
here you don't even need to divide by anything
because they generously provided stars.
So they give you one or two stars
when it's significant at the 1% level or at the 5% level.
So if we look at the full sample, adding the two years,
the coefficient is actually--
so it's a difference in 9%.
The people who were deworming for two years
have 9% higher earnings, but it's not quite significant.
Focusing on older kids who are more likely to be earning
money, because they are in the labor market,
we find larger effect of about 20%.
And that's highly statistically significant.
By dividing 19 by 0.08, I find something greater than 2.
So it's quite significant.
So we can be sure that it's significant.
We can compare that to the mean.
So this is the mean log income.
Then looking at the different outcomes,
we see that we reproduce something
similar for wage earnings, for farm profits, kids
who were dewormed have higher farm profits.
That's true both for the younger and-- for everyone and for just
the younger kids.
And then, hourly earnings, which is how much you're making,
your productivity, how much you're
making per hour that you work, is 32% higher
among the older kids, 14% for the entire sample.
And that is statistically significant.
And then, they also look at various things.
They are more likely to have migrated.
They work longer hours.
They work more days.
And this is for this two years of treatment.
So, overall, it's quite remarkable
that you-- first of all, I want to point out,
it's quite remarkable that they were
able to follow over 7,000 kids for 20 years in rural Kenya.
And it was a large amount of work.
And if you go on Ted Miguel's web page,
you will see him describing how he looked for them on boats.
And some of them were in London.
And they interviewed them by Skype from London,
and so on and so forth.
So they were able to conduct a very good follow-up
of these kids.
Second of all, it is remarkable that we still find a difference
in earnings and in productivity of these children
20 years later.
And that indicates that this deworming treatment had
a long-term effect, which could be via the effect on education
or it can be via the effect on health--
the direct effect on health.
The fact that we see impacts on, for example,
on farm productivity suggests that there might be something
having to do more with your straight physical strength.

Once you do that, you can start asking yourself
the question of whether as a government
deworming is something that is worth doing financially.
You remember, when we were doing--
when we were discussing why do randomized evolution
in the first place?
That came up as a fundamental reason why you want to do that.
Should we invest in deworming as opposed to something else?
So, for example, GiveWell, one of the organization
that helps people choose what to do try and look
at the cost of an intervention compared to the entire benefits
that someone could experience in their lifetime.
And, similarly, the government could do that.
It doesn't mean they are going to be able to recoup
this money in any way.
So it's not a fiscal investment.
But it's telling you whether the investment is worth it
from a social perspective.
So these are the costs that you're
experimenting in the few years.
So since there are costs, it's negative benefits.
So they are very low because it's really not
very expensive to deworm.
The pills themselves are near free.
You just need to send them to the schools
and train the teachers and so on.
So it comes to about half a dollar per child per year.
So these are the costs that you have to pay.
Then you start getting earning gains.
So they assume that these earning gains
that they evaluate in their table starts at year 10
and finishes at year 25 when people retire.
That's pretty conservative because maybe they'll
work longer.
And then they add the consumption gain.
So with just the earning gain, you have a rate of return--
implied rate of return of 40%.
That means it's like--
if you wanted to put your--
if you wanted to instead put your money in--
invest your money somewhere, you would
have to invest it in a security that
brings 40% a year to be good enough
to do this instead of that.
So this is comparable to investing
in a stock that brings 40% a year, which
is not easy to find.
So most things do not cost that much.
And what you have here is what you
would need-- what they estimate is earning gains of about $80
over a working life of 15 years from 10 to 25.
They also calculate the number that
would be sufficient to break even to make it worth it.
So maybe your alternative is a security that pays 10% a year.
That's generous, but maybe this is
what you could do putting the money on the stock market.
If the earning gain had been $8, you would break even.
But the estimate is something closer to $80,
you'd much more than break even.
So that shows that this childhood investment type
things can have this kind of just spectacular effect
compared to doing anything in adulthood.