
PROFESSOR: So that's what leads to a general problem
in medicine, which people refer to as a know-do gap, which
is the gap between what you know and what you do.
So what we can do to look at the know-do gap
is to compare how people, for example,
how Florida responds to my question when I'm telling her
it's a vignette.
So she sees it as an exam of some form.
And she's putting on her brain to say,
"this is what I know I should be doing."
Versus the same Florida, but she doesn't know it's an exam,
someone shows up.
So what's the difference?
What is the difference between your behavior
in an exam or interview situation versus what
you do in the field.
Yeah.
So you see that in every place we
have this know-do gap, which is people
with the same keys given in a vignette people
reach the standard.
For example, in Madhya Pradesh, the provider,
public and private together, reach the right treatment 70%
of the cases on the vignette, but only 20--
about less than 30% when it's a real person.
So they know what to do, but they don't do it.
We have the same thing everywhere.
And then if you compare the public and private,
you can see that the public doctors and the private trained
doctors know more than the private untrained.
They know more as is being revealed by the vignette
not just by their diploma.
They know more, but they do so much less.
At the end of the day, they don't act less,
because the know-do gap is greater for them,
than for them.
So most of this extra knowledge is not really
being usefully deployed.
So a central problem, then, is not
necessary to train more doctors or train them better,
but to convince them to do what they know how to do.
A few facts from this same study that compares people's action
to what they know--
the first fact is that people who
just exercise literally more effort, spend more time,
they complete more checklist items.
They ask more questions.
They do more of what they should be doing.
So this is the checklist across the different standardized
patient.
The more time you spend, the more checklist you do.
And the more checklist you do, the more likely
you are to end up at the correct treatment.
So if you spend more time, you spend more time
on the checklist, you're more likely to treat correctly.
The second fact is that it is actually worth it for them
to work more.
People who spend more time with the patient earn more money.
And so there is a positive return to effort.

The third fact is that among people
who know the correct treatment there is wide variation in
whether or not they do.
So for example, this is the people who know what to do.

The more checklist item you complete, the more likely
you do the correct treatment among people
who know for sure, who think they know for sure,
there still is a lot of variation
in the density of how much checklist item they complete.
So they know what they are supposed
to be doing, know for sure, and yet there
is still a huge variation.
And the people who know, when they
do more of the checklist item, they
are more likely to treat correctly.
This is the relationship between-- among the knowers--
the relationship between correct treatment and checklist
is still there.
So the knowledge isn't completely sufficient.
So this we already showed-- that people who do more save more.
And so they don't spend much time,
even though they could charge more if they spend more time,
and they would arrive at the right treatment more often.
So why would it be the case?
Well, one possibility is they don't have time.
But in fact, they seem to have a lot of time,
because they don't spend so much time with patient per day.
If we're looking at the total time spent with patient
per day, the density, you see that a lot of people
end up spending 50 minutes per patient in a workday.
So you could increase it.
They have scope to increase it, and yet they
don't choose to increase it.
So that's kind of the mystery we have.
So it seems that there is a lot of margin
to act to try to incentivize the public sector to exercise more
effort, to try to work with the private sector
to get a bit better trained, and to also exercise more effort
to deploy the knowledge they have the best.
Yeah?
STUDENT: So you're saying train the private sector better,
why is it not an option to regulate it better?
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So if you regulated them, so what?

What would you do from regulating them?
STUDENT: Well, I mean if you know
the issue's over medicating, or, like, at minimum,
they're spending too little time,
if you're going to put money into training them,
could you also just send that money
into establishing regulations?
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So regulating, in particular, regulating--
so regulating how much time they spend to the patient
might be hard, but regulating the type of medicine
they can prescribe would certainly be very beneficial.
So there has been a thought to do that.
So in India, like in the US, there
are many restrictions on who can prescribe antibiotics
and when you can have it.
And there are antibiotics on various lists.
But if you've ever been sick in India, go to any shop
without any prescription and say, "give me
this like super, top, ultra-duper antibiotic,"
you'll get it.
So I absolutely agree with you that better regulation
is essential.
And it's actually a complicated problem in health care,
as well as elsewhere.
So I should add that in a bullet,
saying find a way to improve your regulation.
So I thought that where you were going
is to say, "we should kick them out,"
which is what the doctors think.
We should just not have them.
But then you see that if we didn't have-- they actually,
at the moment, treat just as well as the public sector.
And they fill a huge gap in the public sector.
So regulating them out of existence
doesn't seem to be a very feasible or desirable short run
solution for this reason.

Incentivizing them to perform a bit more effort would be nice.
So incentivizing-- so you could have
financial incentive in the public sector
or you could have social incentive.
Since we have very little time left,
I'm not going to spend time on that,
except to repeat that it is very, very difficult.
So I have a paper with--
we did an experiment with Abhijit Banerjee and Rachel
Glennerster, where we worked with the government
to put in place a system of financial incentive for nurses.
And this is my worst experiment ever in the sense
that the treatment led to a negative treatment effect.
So after a few weeks, the nurses who were in the treatment group
worked less than the nurses who were and the control group.
So that was not a success.
The reason why we were monitoring them
by having them timestamp their presence.
But their superior didn't punish them when they didn't show up.
So they quickly learned that, in fact, they
can't afford not to show up.
So they decided to show up even less
than they were doing before.
So that didn't work.
Much more promising is an experiment
by Martina Bjorkman and Jakob Svensson
empowering local community to monitor their health workers,
showing them what is wrong, what goes well, what goes badly,
and getting them to work together.
That led to an improvement in the quality
of services in the public sector, and as a result
an improvement in health.
Finally, and this will be my last word, training.
So Abhijit Banerjee and Jishnu Das
did a study on training the unqualified health worker.
And what they found is that that was
effective at getting the workers, not so
much to know more, but to do more of what they know
to do, in particular because it gives them a little bit
more confidence in their own knowledge,
and a little bit more trust of their patient
that they know what they're doing.
And if they're asking one more question,
they can be trusting them that they're
trying to do the right thing.
So the suggestion was a combination
of [INAUDIBLE] regulation and a little bit
of opportunity for the privately provided doctor
to re-certify from time to time so that people trust them more
to do the right thing, even if it's not immediately
what people expect.


n the deworming study, what was the primary purpose of randomizing at the school level as opposed to the individual level?



Organizing treatment through the schools

Reduced sample size

Increased sample size

Reduced spillovers

You have used 1 of 2 attemptsSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.
2.2
1/1 point (graded)
What is the primary downside of randomizing at the school level?



Organizing treatment through the schools

Reduced effective sample size

Increased effective sample size

Reduced spillovers

You have used 1 of 2 attemptsSome problems have options such as save, reset, hints, or show answer. These options follow the Submit button.
This table shows the 10- and 20-year effects of deworming

2.3
1/1 point (graded)
In Column (3) of Table 2, the treatment effect of deworming on per capita household wealth was $253 (converted to USD purchasing power parity) with a standard error of $89. This is statistically significantly different from zero at the 95% level. For which of the following standard errors would the effect still have been statistically significant at the 95% level, assuming the treatment effect is still $253? Select all that apply.



$10

$50

$100

$150

$200

The previous clips established what appears to be a puzzle: preventive health measures like bed nets and vaccines are rarely taken up by people in poor countries despite the fact that they can be extremely beneficial, are available at extremely low prices (often $0) Furthermore, the low take-up does not appear to be driven by some deep mistrust or some religious or cultural beliefs. Why might time-inconsistent preferences explain part of this puzzle? Select all that apply.



People intent to take these measures, but procrastination gets in the way.

The potential benefits are “out of sight; out of mind:” they’re vague and do not accrue until far into the future.

People prefer that such health measures are carried out by the government rather than by an NGO.

The costs (e.g., the opportunity cost of going to the clinic instead of doing something more enjoyable or productive, the potential side effects of the injection, etc.) are small but immediate and salient.
