PROFESSOR: So the problem that we saw for the warming
that people do not seem to be all that excited to take it up.
They do if it's available in the school.
But even when they had to fill a form,
they didn't necessarily fill the form.
And cost sharing is very discouraging.
That is a problem that is more general.
And by the way, that is not just in poor countries.
We are also seeing in richer country, where people
are very keen to access medication or things that
are going to cure them, but less excited to do
preventive health, to undertake preventive health investment,
from proper exercise, to proper nutrition,
to vaccination for the children, to COVID vaccination,
for example.
So in general, what we're seeing in developing
countries is two things.
One is in term of levels.
As Lucas was telling us, low utilization
of cheap health saving medical intervention, breastfeeding,
which is not free because it takes the mothers time,
but doesn't have a monetary cost attached
to it, immunization, oral rehydration solution, chlorine,
and so on.
And very high price elasticity for those services,
both for positive price and for negative price.
So a positive price is where I would
have liked to show you something, which
is there is a summary paper by Pascal in Japan and Michael
Kremer that put together a bunch of goods.
You have soap, which are pretty cheap to produce,
so they are cheap in the market, water filter, vitamins,
bed nets, who are much more expensive,
chlorine pills, de-worming chlorine tablet,
de-worming pills, and so on.
And what they are doing is that they are putting them all
and combining different experiments that
subsidizes these goods at different prices.
And look at the take-up at these different prices.
And what they find is across the board,
for all of these goods, water filter that would cost $25,
a bed net that would cost $7, or de-worming that would cost next
to nothing, regardless of the intrinsic value of the goods,
the process that is being paid has a huge influence on
whether or not people will take it up.
So the higher the price, the lower the take-up.
And the take-up falls quite fast.
So that's the positive prices discourage take-up.
On the other side, we also see that small rewards
encourage use a lot.
And one example that we discussed in the book
is where you have the opposite of negative prices.

Yes Mason?
STUDENT: You provide lentils for children's vaccinations.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So one of the example that is discussed in the books
is incentive for immunization.
Why is it an interesting and important question?
Well now, all of us are very attuned to thinking
about immunization and why people will or will not get
immunized.
But besides, even before the COVID vaccination,
there was a vaccination problem in the world
for the regular, extended program of immunization,
such as measles, polio, and so on.
About 25 million children annually do not get immunized.
Many of these kids are found in India and Nigeria,
which are poor countries, but not ultra poor countries.
But they are big with a lot of people.
And immunization rates, they are quite low.
And what is interesting and is different than in the setup
of the COVID vaccine, is that in many cases,
it's not because parents are deeply resistant.
For example, in India we did a relatively recent survey
in Haryana, where we ask people, what
do you think of immunization?
Is it important?
And 95% to 98% of the parents said, yes, immunization
is great.
I am absolutely planning to immunize my child,
but maybe next month.
So there is no resistance.
It's very different from COVID, where
the people who are excited about COVID vaccine
all have gotten it.
And the people who have not gotten it
have very deep reasons to not like it.
So it's a different setup.
It seems to be something else.
So question we wanted to ask is whether small incentives
could make a difference.
So we worked with an NGO called Seva Mandir in Rajasthan,
India, where you will see a lot of Rajasthan
next week, because we'll show you
a film that Abhijit Banerjee realized with a team
in Udaipur district.

And it's about health.
So you will see more about what the region looks like.
It is very poor, by the standard of India, particularly poor.
And in these places, many kids were not
vaccinated at the baseline, something like only 2%
of children got their full course of immunization.
And so, there was a lot of interest
to do something about it.
And the standard response and government response, as well as
the NGO response is that oh, we need to make
vaccination simpler for people.
It needs to be very close to people's doorstep, et cetera.
So the main idea of the NGO was let's
have immunization camps that we are
going to do very regularly every month
so people know that it's available.
So they organized with the government
to be basically doing the immunization on behalf
of the government.
We also convinced them that they should experiment
with incentives, very small incentives,
so it was a kilo of lentils.
And the kilo of lentils is not going
to persuade anybody who really doesn't like immunization,
because it's not enough.
On the other hand, it could maybe
persuade people who in fact, would like to do it,
but don't get around to do it.
So we had to convince the NGO to do it.
At first, they were like, why would you
pay people to do something that is good for them?
They need to understand by themselves
that they need to do it.
So there was all this discourse, to which
we tried to explain, look, in rich countries,
immunization is not really a choice.
You have to get immunized to go to school.
And you can get out of it if you have
a very strong medical or religious excuse, but E
as in effort.
So in a sense, we have an incentive to get immunized.
Because by default, you have to get immunized.
So finally, they got convinced, and we tried.
And what we found is that-- so we did it in an experiment.
So we had 120 villages.
Half of these villages continued with their standard operating
procedure.
Half of the villages, they installed the camps.
So they run, they hired nurses, they were on motorcycle.
And they brought the vaccines very regularly every month.
And out of this half, half of this half, in addition
got incentives in the form of a kilo of lentils
per immunization and a set of plates
is if they completed the immunization.
And then we looked at immunization rates by the end.
We found that immunization was 6% and the control group,
17% in villages where they had camp but no incentive.
So that's already good, multiplied by 3.
But then it moved to 38%, so more than doubling the rate
without the incentive, once the incentives were put in place.
And interestingly, the cost per child fully immunized
ended up being lower in villages where we put incentives
and in villages where we didn't, where we just had the camp.
Do you see why that would be the case?
Despite the fact that I spend more money
on lentils and on plate, why it would be the case to--

STUDENT: Is it because paying for, like maintaining the camp
and like the employees, since they're already
getting paid for the amount of time,
you get more immunizations.
It ends up being less.
PROFESSOR: Exactly, especially who comes--
I mean, you have your nurse anyways.
So the markets will come, the more the cost per shot
falls down.
And here, not only you had effects in those villages,
where you went from 17% to 38% of kids immunized,
but in addition, you had more kids coming
from the neighboring villages.
So the camps were a completely different vibes
in places with the incentives, where
you only had lots of people, and she was working very hard.
And so the cost per immunization becomes lower.
That's interesting, because in general,
particularly when you talk to government about something
like that, they're like, oh, we can't afford it.
And the answer is that, well, you can't afford it.
But at the same time, if you're willing to pay any cost
to immunize the kids, you might as well
as this cost, the lower possible.
So maybe you should afford it.
These similar results have been reproduced
in another experiment we carried out in India with cell phone
minutes for immunization in work in Pakistan,
with direct cash transfer for immunization, and in work
with in Nigeria with direct cash transfer for immunization.
So these results have been relatively robust or quite
large response to immunization.
So again, just we can look at both the policy implication
of this research, which is we should do incentive
for immunization.
And probably, that is something that can be in the toolbox.
Of course, it can be compared with other things.
It's not necessarily the only thing you might want to do.
And then the second thing is, what does it tell us
about how people behave?
And it's a bit surprising.
Both sides of it are a bit surprising.
The fact that people are so easily discouraged
by small costs, like cost sharing for de-worming,
and the fact that people are so easily encouraged
by a small incentive.
Because this return, this investment
are very high return for your health and for later earnings.
We saw that for immunization, you
can just trust me that it does.
So, given these very high investment,
people should do them.
So if they don't do them, it's because--
it might mean because there is something else that
goes against.
For example, like in the COVID vaccine,
people have a strong belief that it's going to be bad for them.

Then, they should not be persuadable
by a small difference in the price,
either positive or negative.
So we are kind of a little bit stuck here, which
is either it's really good.
And we know it's really good.
So either really good, and then it
has to be balanced by something really bad.
And then I should not be able to convince them
something else is going on.