PROFESSOR: So in this world, you would have something
like subsidy for something like immunization can
be justified for two reasons.
The standard reason is externalities,
which is you want to subsidize people
to get immunized because it's good
not just for them, but for everyone around.
Because if I am-- if my kids are immunized against measles,
they are less likely to give measles to someone else.
And also, what we call internalities,
which is the fact that the human being at period t
is not necessarily making the best
decision for the human being at period t plus 1.
So the parent today might not make the best decision
for the child even next month, and incentives
can help correcting this.

As we discussed in the example that Javier was giving,
incentives is not the only thing that would solve this problem.
Another thing that would solve this problem is constraints.
And moreover, people would be willing to implement this,
to impose this constraint on themselves, like Odysseus
imposed this constraint on himself
and asked his sailors to tie him to the mast.
So that's one thing that could help,
which is called commitment devices.
Another set of things, a set of policy instruments
that could help, is what you may have
heard under the general term of "nudges,"
which is generally steering people in the right direction.
So for example, default option that unless you do some--
unless you take a particular--
unless you really take an action,
you have to do something.
So for example, going back to the compulsory schedule
of immunization in the US or in France, that's the default.
Anything else than the default requires an effort.
Or if you consider immunization at birth, even in India,
100% of kids get the BCG at birth, OK?
In the US, people don't get it anymore.
In Europe, we also still do.
And why 100% of the kids get immunization at birth?
Well, when they get born, there is a nurse over there,
or a midwife.
She does it.
And she said-- so the default is, if you're here,
I'm doing it.
And it would take an effort to say, no, no, no,
I'm against immunization, or it would
require to think about it.
And by default, there is no particular reason
why people would object.
So that's a default. And a default,
if the defaults are well set up, they
steer people where you think they would want to do.
So one big difference between the rich and the poor,
both world-wide-- so us in rich countries versus people who
live in poorer countries, or even within a country--
within rich countries, the rich and the poor;
within poor countries, the rich and the poor--
is the poorer you are and the fewer defaults there are,
because the poorer you are, and the more you are on your own--
maybe self-employed, a farmer or a small business
without a well-functioning public service
system around you that can create
a natural default for things.
So in other words, for us in rich countries,
and even for the rich people in poor countries,
if they don't think about most issues,
it's just going to work out.
So take the example of water.
If you open the tap in your kitchen,
the water is clean to drink.
By default, you have access to clean water.
If you really wanted to get bad water,
you might be able to find some--
like, I don't know, somewhere in the Charles River.
Even the Charles River is pretty clean.
But that would require some effort.
If you live in a poor country, even in Delhi today,
you open a water from the tap, and it is not clean.

So if you don't think about the problem of water in Cambridge,
you're going to drink water all the time.
If you don't think about the problem of water in Delhi,
you're going to drink bad water, and you
need to do something about it-- put chlorine tablet,
or to filter it, or to boil it, et cetera.
And think about these decisions adding up--
many, many, many, many of those decisions
you have to take all the time.
If you never think about de-worming at MIT,
chances are you'll never get worms.
If you've never thinks about de-worming in Busia, Kenya,
chances are you will get worms.
So that's one more thing you have to think about.
So the life of the poor is full of-- basically,
what the world requires from the poor is much more
responsibility on many, many, many, many, many, many, many,
many things.
So in some sense, we shouldn't be surprised, like as I said,
[INAUDIBLE] the surprise saying, oh,
people are quite sensitive to small costs,
and they seem to be--
they don't take as many preventive care actions
and so on.
But in some sense, it's remarkable
how many of these actions they are
taking given that each of them is a different decisions that
has to be taken sometime every day-- for example, the getting
water.
So one thing that can be done in policy is to try and create
safer default. But it's hard because it really
require to be super organized.
For example, for your default for every child
to be immunized, you would really
need to make to have a default that every child gets
a well visit every year, which is not there.
And to have that default of a well visit every year,
you would need to have enough health clinics,
and you would need the health clinic personnel to be present,
and so on and so forth.