PROFESSOR: Today we are going to be talking
about health and in particular about how people decide
to invest in health and in particular preventive health
and set up the stage to think also about how they are served.
What's the market for health?
What's the quality of health?
What's the quality of public and private health
options and so on?
Let's start with a recap from the last lecture.
So if you remember from last time,
we saw that nutrition based poverty trap can arise
but only if there is a very strong relationship
between income and nutrition on the one hand
and between nutrition and income on the other hand.
So basically, what you need is the inherited
income or the income you're starting in one period.
If you inherit x or you start your day with x,
you need to end up with more than x at the end of the day.
So you need at some point that there is a very steep segment
of the curve that is going to cross the 45 degree
line from below.
Otherwise, even if there is this double relationship that
creates a mapping between today's income and tomorrow's
income, if it's shallow enough, then that's
not going to generate a poverty trap.
And then what we saw last time in Professor Schilbach's
lecture is that even when you control for endogeneity,
we do find a pretty robust relationship of food
expenditure to total expenditure.
But the elasticity is below 1.
It's about 0.8.
So what this means is that if I increase your income by 10%,
I increase your food expenditure by 8%.
And in addition, not only this food expenditure
is not going to be 100% additional calories,
because how is it going to be divided?
If I spend more on food, I'm going to spend more
across two different things.
What are these two things?

Olivia.
STUDENT: One of them was meat.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So not just meat, but generally calories
that are more expensive.
So when you're very poor, you're going to try and get--
to buy yourself the cheapest bread and find
nutritious food that are cheap.
And when you become a bit richer,
you can afford to buy food that is
a little bit more expensive for getting the same nutrition.
And roughly a rule of thumb is that it's
divided about half and half.
So if I increase your income by 10%,
I increase your food expenditure by 8%.
And this 8% is in turn divided into about 4%
extra calories and 4% more expensive calories.
So that gives us an elasticity that is closer to 0.4.
Meanwhile, we have a relationship
between food expenditure and productivity
that is also positive.
But the best we can tell is it's maybe again around 0.4.
So the product of the two is going
to be 0.016, which is very, very, very
far cry from being 1.
In other words, when I increase your income by 10%,
I'm going to increase your productivity via this nutrition
productivity channel just by 1.5% or so.
So it is hard to imagine that we will
be able to generate a nutrition based poverty trap based
on just this phenomenon in general.
It could still be moments where people
are near starvation or at starvation
where it will matter.
And certainly in history, there has been
moment where it had mattered.
For example, Robert Fogel speaks about medieval Europe
and points out that there were many people who
were just begging, beggars.
And one interpretation of seeing so many beggars in the city
is that those were people who were actually
too weak to do any meaningful physical work.
So they were probably stuck in this exact nutrition
based poverty trap.
But today in the world, even in poor countries,
in this kind of normal course of time,
one can imagine that actually that may not be going on.
But child nutrition might be a mechanism through which
a poverty trap might emerge.
This is because at one time, you do a one time
investment in the child or could it
even be a one time investment in the pregnant mother.
So it's a child while in utero.
That can generate long term impact not just
one time but year after year after year after year.
It's not the same as eating well today.
That's going to make you productive.
It's just changing your way of being in general.
So one way to see it is to think about the capacity curve.
You remember the capacity curve.
It links my productivity to how much I consume.
So how could we think about the childhood nutrition
with respect to the capacity curve?
So what we've seen before is that if you eat more today,
that's movement along the curve.
How should I think about child nutrition
in the context of the capacity curve?
Lucas?
STUDENT: Could it be in terms of shifting the entire curve?
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
And where would you shift it?
STUDENT: You would shift it so that there
would be more output tomorrow for any given level today.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So we would shift it either to the left.
So that's this big thing is coming up earlier.
So it needs less to be in the good range, less income
to be in the good range.
Or you could shift it such that it's
tilted upwards a little bit such that at any level,
you're getting more productivity for the same amount
of nutrition you're getting.
So basically, we're talking about child nutrition
as changing the machine that we are,
making you more able to benefit from the nutrients
that you're going to get your entire life.
So if that's the case, that really
changes the ball game altogether,
because this very small amount of this increase in nutrition
in the one time is going to generate dollars year
after year after year, which could be
many, many, many, many dollars.
So the return to that investment would suddenly turn out
to be much larger than 1.
So let's see whether we can find something like that.