PROFESSOR: The bottom line is teaching health behavior,
teaching is very difficult. And whenever
people have done studies of looking
at trying to convince people to do various things,
basically it is not very effective.
So for example, in the deworming studies,
they had one component where they were telling people
to wear shoes and to not swim in the lake,
and that has absolutely no impact on behavior.
In Bihar, we did a study on iron-fortified salt.
We produced a movie with local actors and so on.
It has absolutely zero effect on take-up
of iron-fortified salt in contrast
to very large effect of subsidy.
Pascaline Dupas, Michael Kremer and I
did a study on HIV/AIDS prevention
in primary school in Kenya.
To evaluate, we actually evaluated the official program
of the government in collaboration
with the government.
Trained teachers, et cetera.
Nothing happened.
So basically, public health campaigns,
information campaigns are generally
not effective-- with some exceptions.
Some of them catch up.
For example, in Bangladesh, they put skull and bones
on the wells that have arsenic in them
to discourage people to use them and that was very effective.
But generally, it's hard to get into people.
And maybe-- in Bangladesh, it turned out
to be effective and counterproductive
because they're unaware-- because of the scale of bones
on the deep wells, they went to more shallow wells that
don't have arsenic, but they have a lot of diarrhea.
So in fact, kids become sick of diarrhea,
so that campaign was actually misguided.
But at least its primary effect of discouraging people
from using the arsenic-contaminated wells
was effective.
But it is hard.
So just-- it is so hard that--
and it makes sense and you can just
think about what happened during COVID
and trying to explain to people how COVID works
and what they need to do and to relate very naturally to that.
So if teaching people is hard, then it
shows-- it suggests that there are large benefits for making
it as easy as possible.
So try whenever it's possible to have
default option, compulsory behavior, incentives,
et cetera.
When overuse is an issue, try to make access
to curative care a bit harder than access to preventive care.
And then there is the note that we discussed already,
which is in developing countries,
we are really swimming upstream because everything
is the opposite.
Everything is hard when it should be easy and easy when
it should be hard, and that's what-- that is something
that people have to fight with in their everyday life.
Julie, you had a question?

STUDENT: Are the studies saying that health education generally
doesn't work true in most countries?
PROFESSOR: I think in every settings
that I've seen it, something that we always come back to,
we always hope that this one campaign will work,
and it's pretty much systematically
super disappointing.

So if you-- given that in developing countries
everything is harder and the objective
is to make it as easy as possible,
for sure you would want to make preventive care free.
You would want to provide incentives and so on.
So for example, bed nets you would want to give for free.
Chlorine to put in water you would need to give for free.
And if possible to put it right there at the source--
So Michael Kremer innovated with putting chlorine dispenser
right near to the source.
So you basically, it's very easy, but as
soon as you get your water to put chlorine in it,
you don't have to think about it.
The question is that when you do that and the reason why there
has been a very active policy debate on these type of issues
is, oh, if you give people chlorine for free
or if you give people bed nets for free, they might misuse it.
Or they might be used to being given stuff
and then really not do anything by themselves.
Or maybe to see that your friend got something for free
might discourage you to get it yourself.
So that's a slightly patronizing way to relate to people,
but this was really the dominant way
to think about free distribution until not so long ago.
So then Pascaline Dupas, whom we have heard a lot in this class,
decided, when she was a graduate student, that she was going
to put this idea to the test.
And she set up a series of experiments on free-- on bed
nets.
Bed nets to prevent--
to protect people from malaria.
The one I'm talking about today is not the first one,
she did but the one she did later,
which is more complete, even.
So in the first round, people get a voucher for a bed net
at a reduced price.
From 3 to a few dollars.
Up to 50% of discount, roughly.
In the second round a few months later,
they get a second voucher all at about 75% subsidies.
So the midpoint of the range of subsidies
that was offered before.
And then with that, we can answer all of our question.
How sensitive people are to prices?
What's the elasticity of the price
you have to pay on actual usage once you have the good?
Do you get discouraged from future purchase?
And your neighbors, do they get discouraged or encouraged
by seeing you getting something for free?
So the first result is here, which
is that we've already seen that graph in some sense on,
which is the more people have to pay, the less likely
they are to get the thing.
So with when the bed net is free, 100% of them get it.
When they have to pay $3, which is less than half the price,
less than 20% get it.
However, people who have had--
if we look at usage rate, which they
do by showing up to their doorstep at night time,
you can see that basically, of the people who have it,
they are just as likely to use it once they get it for free
as if they had to pay for it.
So this fear that people would not
value a good that they got for free is just not realized.
The anecdotes of people misusing the nets as fishing
nets and so on are just that, anecdotes.
You can always find someone, but it's not something
that's statistically verified.
Then we can look at what they do next
when they offer the second net.
So even though they already have one,
if they got their first one for free,
they are, in fact, more likely to purchase the second one.
So if anything, people don't get used
to the net-- they don't get used to the handouts,
they get used to using the nets.
And so there is some learning or some habit-forming thing
that they realize that sleeping under a net is fine,
and then they get another one.
And finally, their neighbors are more
likely to buy a net if others got it for free.
So all of that suggests that giving things for free
can help in--
and maybe providing incentives can help.
With bed nets, this set of studies
have had absolutely transformative impact
because what happened is that people actually
listen to her-- or to them because these type of studies
were replicated in various contexts.
The rhetoric around the supply of nets in the public health
world changed.
Countries started distributing net for free.
In Africa, they even did a bed nets and measles
campaign combined.
So the bed nets were used as incentives
to get people to get measles, so they got both nets and measles
at the same time.
Huge amount of bed nets got distributed.
There was an article in Nature a few years ago,
which tried to estimate how many cases of malaria that
led to averting, and they estimate
that it's about 540 million cases of malaria
less because of this massive net distribution.
And then that also was responsible for one
of the very big good news of the 1990s
into 2000, which is a big decline in malaria
cases worldwide up until COVID where
we stopped distributing bed nets because we stopped everything.
So this is to show that this type of studies,
it's not just studies, they actually do get-- sometimes
they really get traction because here, they contributed
to change the mindset of governments
vis-a-vis the poor, of people in the West vis-a-vis people
in developing countries, and therefore, to change the type
of programs that were realized.
But the bottom line is that there is still
much more research and action needed
to understand what are the barriers to effective health
behavior.
We have some understanding of some things,
but we don't know everything.
Some of the obvious magic bullets
like just free health care, free everything
doesn't work as well.
For example, with the overuse of antibiotics
that itself leads to resistance, mounting, and so on,
that doesn't work.
And the opposite, having people pay for everything
at full price, that also doesn't work.
There are some now novel ideas that I didn't talk about today
but we may talk about, for example, on immunization.
Using the social networks, using social image concern, and so
on, but there is much more to be done.
And if you are-- and there is much more
to be done in getting good health to people.
So if it's something that appeals to you now or later,
there's a whole wide field open.