
PROFESSOR: So that's what Thaler and Sunstein called the choice
architecture.
So basically, the choice architecture
is harder if you're poor than if you're rich.
It's more demanding on you, and you kind of
keep having to work on it.
So let's go back a minute for the commitment devices.
So I gave you a made up example that
was not absolutely excellent.
But let me give you a real example, which
is a study by Professor Schilbach from this very class,
which is the demand for incentive to stop drinking.
So alcohol is a problem in the world, in general.
But it's also a problem among poor countries.
Many people also identify it as a problem for themselves.
There are many reasons why people might start drinking.
That's a form of self-medication against pain, which they also
suffer from.
But despite all of this, when you ask people,
many men, in particular, who drink
would like to stop drinking a lot.
So Frank offered rickshaw drivers--
those are the people who are pulling
on the cycle who are pulling little carts, people or goods.
They offered rickshaw drivers a chance
to commit to stop drinking.
So they asked them to come to his lab.
And then they first have them experiment with incentives
or straight incentives to come to the lab
so that they understand what this means.
And after a few days, when they've
experienced-- when people get incentive not to drink,
they drink less.
How do we know they are not drinking?
Well, the only way we know they are not drinking
is, we know they are not drinking up to a given time,
because they come and get checked.
After they have gone to the lab, they could go and drink silly.
That is harder to check.
But at least it gives them incentive
to not drink before they show up to the lab,
let's say, at 7:00 in the evening.
So they do that for some time.
He gives them incentives.
And then the people who get incentives, in fact,
drink less.
So after that, they give them a choice between three scenarios.
And they tell them that one of these scenarios
will be implemented.
They ask them to choose what they want.
In one of the scenarios, they do better if they
are sober under incentive.
They are under the sure payment, so they
get the choice between incentive or sheer payment.
And in the first scenario is a classical scenario where
you can do a bit better financially,
in fact, if you take the incentive and, in fact,
you stay sober.
In one scenario, it's even.
So for example, it's like 50 rupees per day
if you are under the sure payment and then 50 rupees
if you come sober, so even, and zero if you come drunk.
And in one scenario, it's 50 rupees
if you choose a sure payment.
And if you choose the incentive, it's
40 rupees if you are sober and zero if you don't come,
if you are not sober.
You see, for each, they ask them.
So first scenario, incentives could be good
if you, in fact, managed to stay sober.
Second scenario, incentives break
even if you stay sober and otherwise are bad.
Third scenario, incentives will earn you less money,
even if you are sober.
So someone rational, what should they pick--
who is not someone who is just trying to maximize money.
What should they pick in each scenario?
In the first scenario?

They should pick the incentive if they
think that they'll manage.
Right?
Second scenario.

You might as well go with a sure payment,
because you can never be absolutely sure that you'll
manage.
And the third scenario?

For sure, there is no reason to pick the incentive.
Why take something that earns less, in the best case?
And so what is striking is that quite a few people--
I think about 30% of people or 35% of people
choose incentive under scenario three.
That means that they are willing to leave money on the table
to constrain themselves.
So really think about Odysseus tying himself to the mast
and having first to shop to buy the cord.
They find it so valuable to constrain themselves
via these incentives that they go and pick the incentive,
even when they lose money, which shows, number one,
that there might be value.
And then he follows them up, et cetera,
and finds that indeed, the ones who are picking the incentives
are less--
or who benefit from the incentive drink less.
So that suggests that, A, these constraints
do help and B, people--
we are sophisticated enough to realize
that we might need them, or those rickshaw drivers
are sophisticated enough to realize
that they might need them and to be willing to pay a price
to get them.
Yeah?
STUDENT: So when was this study made?

PROFESSOR: I would say five years ago.

What did you ask?
STUDENT: I don't know.
[LAUGHS]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's maybe a bit--
it's going to date me.
But it is actually-- it was Frank.
It was Professor Schilbach, "Job Market Paper."
So he was a PhD student at Harvard when he was doing that.
So that dates him, obviously.