PROFESSOR: Another thing that this
leads to is for us to start in particular this discussion we
had about how people react to curative
care versus preventive care.
Should make us think about whether you would want health
to be provided publicly or privately.
So [INAUDIBLE] had a very strong idea about it.
He pointed out that health care is
a credence good, which substantial asymmetric
information.
One way to say it in plain English
is that health care is like being a garagist.
The people who fix your car, a car mechanic, they
know a lot about your car that you don't know.
And therefore, you go and you say, oh, they say,
oh, your car, it's all broken.
I have to change this and I have to change that
and it's going to cost you a ton of money.
And you're like, I don't know.
You have to trust them.
So that's car mechanic is another credence good.
So health care is people understand much less
than the doctors that they have and learning is very difficult.
And in addition, there are externalities because health
status, a lot of diseases are contagious.
Not quite all of them.
As a result, people will have low demand
for things that are good for them
and high demand for things that are good for others.
So you cannot rely on individuals to make all
the decisions that are right for society.
They will tend to be under-immunized and take
too much antibiotics.
So for all these reasons, you would
imagine that unregulated private health care would treat people
badly and to over provide medication.
So [INAUDIBLE],, who is one of the great godfathers
of genomics, told us it is a general social consensus
clearly that the laissez faire solution for medicine
is intolerable.
So comparing to that, what do we have in developing countries?
We indeed have a terrible private health sector.
Terrible.
Terrible as in 77% of the private provider
in rural areas in India have no medical degree.

There's no medical degree at all.
So you guys could just start establishing yourself
as a doctor, and you would be much more qualified
than the average providers that call themselves a doctor.
Of those who have a degree, only 4%
have what we would call an MD and the other
have this kind of different either lower
or alternative medicine degrees.
In the average village, there are
three providers with no degrees, less than one with some degree,
and only 20% with an MD.
The public providers are more qualified
and they offer free services, but they only
have 1/5 of the market share.
And even if there is a public health center right there,
they still have only about 1/3 of the market share.
So in comparison to the [INAUDIBLE] thing,
what [INAUDIBLE] told us is--
[INAUDIBLE] told us, well, given the structure
of what health is, the private sector would
be so bad that there should be no private sector.
And half of that is true.
The private sector is terrible.
But it is completely dominant.
So what's going on here?
So the first thing you might ask is, OK, they're not qualified,
but maybe they know-- maybe despite not
being formally qualified, they have
a lot of relevant experience.
So for that we can try and ask vignettes.
So a vignette is a standardized patient
that's proposed to a doctor.
If one day you do medicine and you do board exams,
you will do a vignette, which is basically a case that's
proposed to you on paper.
And you have to study it.
For example, you describe, I'm describing to you the vignette.
It's known to be fictional.
A women come to the clinic with a child who has
diarrhea for the last two days.
What do you do?
So here the right answer is to ask me about stool
to figure out if there is blood.
Is it dysentery or a virus?
Do they have fever?
In this particular case, it is all the indications
are that it is viral.
There is no fever.
There is no blood in the stool.
The right solution is oral rehydration solution.
So [INAUDIBLE] who did a lot of studies
on using these vignettes, so on the vignette for diarrhea,
this is the type of things that people should have done,
question they should have asked, exam
they should have performed.
Again, this is just in a dialogue.
I'm interviewing [INAUDIBLE].
So what do you do?
And she should tell me, well, ask the patient
if there is blood in the stool.
Check the fontanel to see whether the child is dehydrated
and so on.
And what you can see is that-- so here the doctors
are ranked by how competent they are,
which is how well they answer to the vignette on average.
And what we see is that in India,
for example, even if you take the most competent doctor,
they ask the question about blood in the stool less
than half the time.
They almost never check the fontanel.
They ask about fever 60% of the time.
And they ask the frequency of stool maybe 60% of the time.
That's the best doctor in the sample.
And the worst one basically did none of that.
So across countries, there are two conclusions.
The first one is that the average quality is low
and the second is there is a lot of heterogeneity.
And the third, which summarizes the two,
is you have to be above median to do less harm than--
to not do harm.
You remember the slogan of doctors.
Don't do harm.
And this, you have to be only the top half of doctors
do not do harm when they're faced with a vignette.
So they don't do much.
The second thing we can ask is, well, they don't know much.
What do they do?
So how do we know what people do, what doctors do?
There are two things you could do.
You could just sit next to them while they do their work.
So I don't know if you've been to your GP and they tell me,
oh, there is someone who is just looking what I do,
like a resident.
So you could likewise have a researcher just
sitting there looking at what they do.
One could imagine that if they are observed, maybe
they work a little bit harder.
So that's going to give you an upper bound of how good
the doctors, how well they work.
And then there is another method that can be done,
which is to say send standardized patient, which
in other words is like an audit study.
So send someone to the doctor who pretends to be sick.
So for example, to ask about diarrhea,
someone comes to another village or someone comes to a village
and say, I come from this other village
and there is a child who has diarrhea.
What do I do?
So the doctors think that we are talking about a real child.
Or someone presents themselves and they have chest pain
and panicked.

Doctor, help me.
Like that.
After this is finished, you go and debrief the doctor
saying this person was actually fake.
So what do we find?
So from direct observation is on average,
they spend two minutes.
If you look at Delhi for example,
from direct observation, they spend
two minutes with the patient.
They ask one question.
They perform one exam, and they give you two medicine.
So that's your visit.
Quick and efficient.
So that's how much effort is being given.
These are results from doing standardized patient
across different countries.
So these are, for example, the person
showing up with chest pain or discussing the case
of a child with diarrhea.
This is assessing whether at the end of the day
you got the correct treatment.
So in India, various places in India, and then this
is China and Kenya.
So in Kenya, it's not bad.
Half of the doctor gives you at least some correct treatment,
although 20 gives you only the correct treatment and 30
gives you something in addition that you don't need.
In India, it's somewhere between 10% and 30%
who gives you correct treatment.
You can see that you get a lot of over treatment,
a lot of incorrect treatment, many antibiotics.
55% in Kenya, 67% steroid in some cases.
Very few referrals.
So these doctors not only do they know very little,
but they don't treat very well.
So all of that is in the private sector.
Why do people still choose the private sector?
Incorrect treatment costs the patient a lot of money.
70% of the cost of the visit is antibiotic or another drug
that you don't need.

And yet people go to the private doctor.
So in Udaipur, you're going to see the film next week,
only one out of five visitors to the public sector.
In Madhya Pradesh, 90% of the visits are to a private doctor.
And then in Delhi where it's the city,
there is on average 70 private provider within 15 minutes
walk, which indicates that there is demand for them.
So people much prefer the private sector.
So why?
Well, one response is given by one
of these standardized patient visits in Madhya Pradesh.
And I'm going to summarize it rapidly.
What they find is that although the public doctors are better
trained, so they know more, they perform,
they have better diploma, they perform better on vignette,
but they spend even less time with the patient.
And as a result, they don't treat any better.
On balance, they are not more likely to get
to the correct treatment, perhaps even slightly worse.
So one of the reasons why people continue
to go to the private sector is the private doctor
exercise a little bit more effort.
And although they know less, they
are able to use whatever little knowledge they have
a little bit more effectively.