PROFESSOR: Continue to deworming.
So from a policy perspective, it suggests you would--
you want to do it.
As a government or as a charity, it's a great investment.
It also suggests that there are very large elasticity
of lifetime earning with respect to better
nutrition in childhood.
Does this mean we have a poverty trap based on that?
Now, we found something where we have
a huge impact, huge elasticity of lifetime earning
with respect to nutrition in childhood.
Does this mean that childhood nutrition-- in particular,
maybe, deworming-- is a poverty trap,
is a source of a poverty trap?
STUDENT: It might be in the sense
that the way you eat in childhood
influences your whole life after.
So it's a two-way street in a way
that if you eat well, then your income can be higher,
you work more, and everything.
If you don't eat well, then that constrains your possibilities
and your future of your whole life.
PROFESSOR: So we definitely have one part
of the equation, which is eating well in childhood influence
your earnings.
Sorry-- yeah.
STUDENT: Yeah, I was going to say, going off
that, you can see the impacts moving forward
and that there is positive result in the future.
But that doesn't necessarily mean,
without having the deworming program in the future,
that you would be in the state of poverty
that we talked about previously with poverty traps.
You have to measure the other side of the--
you [INAUDIBLE] effect on the poverty trap equation as well.
Moving forward, saying that, you would
have to measure the people who didn't receive deworming
as a child aren't able to maybe get a job
or be productive due to different illnesses
or something like that they contracted when they were older
since they didn't get the deworming.
There needs to be something else there.
PROFESSOR: That's right.
But when I think-- when I think about the other half,
I'm thinking, for example, about the people
who didn't get dewormed.
What is the other half we need to look at?
Julie?
STUDENT: So the other half would be saying that you wouldn't--
to make a trap, that would mean that if you
don't have enough money to buy the-- to pay for deworming.
So maybe that part isn't true.
Maybe it's so cheap that there isn't that half,
or maybe it isn't.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the question now is-- remember,
it's the product of the two.
So we do have the first half of that product or one half
of that product, which is if you get dewormed, you get
huge increase in elasticity.
So certainly, there is a potential there.
But then we have to look at the other side of the ledger, which
is, is it very expensive to deworm your child?
So to go on Samantha's point, is it the case that someone who
was not dewormed in childhood cannot afford to deworm
their own children?
And is it something that's likely?

[INAUDIBLE]-- yeah.
STUDENT: Well, based on how much it costed the program to do,
it sounds like it's a pretty affordable treatment.
But as it-- it might be something
else as to the reason, like in the reading
about the vaccination and not taking preventative steps.
There might be other factors, rather than poverty trap.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the fact is, it is extraordinarily cheap.
$0.50 per child a year is the total cost,
but the cost of the medicine for a family,
if they go to the shop, is more on the order of $0.10.
So even the poorest family could, in principle, do it.
And therefore, that elasticity, logically speaking,
should be really, really, really low
because it is not your income that is preventing you,
per se--
that is preventing you to get the deworming medicine.
So even though there is this super strong impact
of deworming on future livelihood,
there is still not a poverty trap just related to money.
What we have to keep in mind is something else
that prevents the poor that comes in the way of doing
this investment for the poor.
It is the case that deworming is not that frequent.
And it is the case that even small cost
seems to be discouraging them.
In fact, in this particular study,
the NGO insisted that they should introduce cost sharing.
So they started sharing for--
asking parents to pay a little amount for the medicine,
and then the [INAUDIBLE] collapsed.
So the cost seemed to be prohibitive and discouraged
people.
But it has to be that it's not just
the availability of the income because even
the poorest family could, in principle, afford
this investment.
So that's where it leaves us in terms of thinking of poverty
trap, that it is unlikely that deworming is itself
the source of a poverty trap per se.
It has to be combined with something else, which
is what we are going to talk more about today, which is how
come being poor seemed to cut down the avenues to undertake
investments that could be highly valuable for health
and for future livelihood, such as health--
such as deworming, vaccination, and so on.