PROFESSOR: It can't be explained by fear or by lack of trust
because if it was fear or lack of trust,
I couldn't convince people with [INAUDIBLE]..
In fact, we've seen that during the COVID crisis.
There was this luxury incentive.
You [INAUDIBLE] or something like that.
They have not persuaded really anybody to get the vaccine.

So two explanations have been proposed for this puzzle.
The first one goes under the jargon of time inconsistent
preferences.
And the second one is about the difference between reality
and perception, which is, even though the real benefits might
be very large, people might not know that,
such that the perceived benefits still remain quite low.
And then that could explain why people are not
so excited to do it.
So this is Clocky.
Thank you so much.
SPEAKER: You're welcome.
PROFESSOR: This is Clocky, just on time.
Have you seen a Clocky before?
So what is Clocky?
STUDENT: Oh, it's like, this alarm
clock that's supposed to roll around your room to
wake you up?
PROFESSOR: Yes.
STUDENT: You're supposed to chase it.
PROFESSOR: Every MIT student should have a Clocky.
So this is an alarm clock that chases around your room.
So you can't stop-- you can't just lose it.
You have to get up to find it.
And why do we need Clocky?

Sorry?
STUDENT: We're human.
PROFESSOR: Yes, and in what way, specifically?
Yes, [INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: It forces you to get up and actually
turn the alarm off.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
STUDENT: You can't just slap the Snooze button [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
And why would you be so likely to hit the Snooze button?
STUDENT: It's easier.
PROFESSOR: Because it's easier.
But in particular, why don't you just wake up when the alarm--
sorry?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's hard to wake up.
That's because you're very tired!
STUDENT: You need one to chase you to go to bed.
PROFESSOR: And why are you very tired in the morning?

I mean, you know why are you.
Don't look puzzled.
This is a real question.
Why are you guys very tired when you
try to wake up in the morning?
Why is it that you all need Clocky?
STUDENT: We didn't sleep enough.
PROFESSOR: Because you didn't sleep enough!
And why you didn't sleep enough?
STUDENT: MIT?
PROFESSOR: Because you are doing problem sets.
And maybe with most people in this class, probably
because you are doing problem sets.
But maybe you are chatting with your friends or something
like that.
In any case, you had something to do
that seemed very, very, very urgent in the evening.
It's finishing your problem set or talking to your friends
or watching a film or being on Discord or whatever it is you
guys are doing.

But that seems very urgent in the morning.
And the difficulty of waking up and how miserable
you're going to feel at 8:00 in the morning
didn't seem that present at that time.
So this, in a nutshell, is time inconsistent preferences,
is that in reality, if you thought about it,
would think, yeah, it's going to really, really,
really suck tomorrow morning to try and wake up.
Or it's going to be impossible.
And I'm going to run into other difficulties.
But you don't because the present
and whatever it is you are doing at this one moment
seems is looming so large.
So this is, as Javier summarized it, profoundly human.
I don't think we can change that.
We are like that as humans.
STUDENT: We can change it.
PROFESSOR: You can fight it.
You can-- so what can you do?
You can fight against it.
But this is a human tendency, let's say.
You can fight against it, for example, by--
what would you do to go to sleep earlier?
What is one thing one might decide to do?
What would you do to try and--
STUDENT: I would create one to chase me into bed
and force me to.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, you would try and create
a Clocky that pushes you, forces you.
So basically, you want to tie your hands is
one possibility, is you want to tie your hands in advance.
So do you know the story of Odysseus
and the mermaids, or the sirens?
So someone who is not Javier, just to change the--
people who know this that wants to tell [INAUDIBLE] the story,
and all of us, the stories of Odysseus.
There are many stories of Odysseus,
but one of these stories that is relevant to this.

[INAUDIBLE]
STUDENT: He wants to hear the sirens who
sing very beautifully.
But then when you get close to them, they kill you.
So he knows that, obviously, before he hears them,
he knows he doesn't want to go to them.
But he knows that when he does hear them,
all that reason will go out the window.
And he'll want to hear them.
So he has himself be tied up so that he physically cannot go
to [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So Odysseus is on his boat and has heard about these sirens,
that once you hear them, their song is so impossibly beautiful
that you cannot resist but jump into the water.
And in advance, he decides--
he gets his sailors to tie him around a mast so he cannot
jump.
So you have a thing that forces you to go to bed at--
your Clocky that chases you and puts you in bed in the evening
is one way of-- in advance, today, like, around 2:00
in the afternoon, when whatever you
have to do tonight doesn't look that important,
you are able to compare rationally this evening
and tomorrow morning.
You will say, OK, I have to tie myself around the mast.
I will stop doing my problem set.
And I will go to bed at a reasonable time.
So that's putting yourself--
constraining yourself like that.
You could do other things.
You could use peer pressure.
You could form a group of people who
decide that they will all kind of check on each other
to make sure they sleep.
I don't know how that would work.
So you could use that.

One could set up--
again, I don't know how far I want to carry out this example.
But one could set up incentives where, if you're--
yeah, if, for example, if your computers are indeed off,
we can monitor that you are on the internet or not.
If you are, in fact, not on the internet past midnight,
you get some reward.
And otherwise, you don't.
Oh, I haven't seen people do that.
Although Frank did something quite similar to help people
sleep.
But one could also consider, for example,
for going to the gym, which is also
something that is going to generate returns in the future,
to be healthy in your mind and body and so on.
But you might not do it on a day-to-day basis.
So an incentive might push you in the right direction.
So you'll get something right away.
So that's time inconsistent preferences.
So you might do tend to consider the present
and the entire future differently.
So if I can get them to think--
the first thing is, if I can get them to think today
about the entire future, they will make better decisions.
That's the designing this Clocky thing.
Or providing small incentive to counteract
the temptation in the moment can also work out.
So that's one reason why incentive might work.
Think about a parent who wants to immunize
the child who is, in general, thinking it's a good thing.
But on the other hand, it's never particularly urgent.
You can always wait another month or another week.
The child is not sick.
There is no crisis.
And there is always something else that might come in the way
and constitute a crisis.
So you will have a tendency to push it till the next time.
And then eventually, before you know it,
all the time will have passed.
The kid is too old or has already gotten sick.
So there are the incentives because you're
going to get the [INAUDIBLE] right away,
you might think, OK, fine, it is a cost.
But it solves an immediate problem, which
is to have those [INAUDIBLE]
So that could explain why you would postpone it
and why incentives would work or why
things like a compulsory schedule of immunization
that we tend to have in the rich countries
would also work, even if you allow people to get away
from it because it forms--
basically anything else than just getting it done
is complicated and costly.
So you might as well just get it done.