PROFESSOR: So what else can they do?
So as Lucas told us earlier, they can try and work more.
Or I guess he was saying, he was talking about diversification.
So I'm coming before we get to diversification.
They could say, well, in bad times, you just work more.
So in some sense, that's also what
happens if you have for you, risks
might be many tests at the same time.
And you cannot insure against having too much homework
at the same time.
But what you can do is to put more hours of work.
The thing is that unlike your own work on your own exam,
which is going to improve your own grades,
with the fact that other people are also working
doesn't really affect you.
Or maybe it affects you positively
because there's no one to party.
And there are people to do problem sets with.
So in your world, if there is a shock
in the sense of many homework, at least everybody
is rowing in the same direction.
But the problem with the pool is that if everybody
start working together, what is going to happen to wages?
So say, there is a drought.
So therefore, profits of the farmer is very low.
And they might want to be looking for a second job.
And also, they fire people.
They don't hire too many people.
And then as a response, all of the workers say,
oh, I better start and get a job.
Then what's going to happen to the wages
as a function of that?
Yeah?
STUDENT: The wages are going to fall.
PROFESSOR: The wages are going to fall even further.
So the response to the low wages is to work harder.
But then that creates an extra labor demand
that we don't know what to do with.
And the wages are going to fall even further.

And this is for the poor.
That is going to affect them the most
because the drop in consumption is more costly to the poor.
So they are the ones who bring their labor at this moment.
So this leads to an increase in risk.
And again, not only risk cause poverty,
but poverty also cause risk.
Because it's the poor people who respond
to an initial decline in the wage
by working more, and therefore, exacerbate the initial fall
in the wage.
So she shows this result here, which is interesting,
which shows that well, if you had access to other ways
of insuring yourself, for example,
if you could borrow or save, then you wouldn't--
this is the wage.
And this look at the wage elasticity.
So when the wage is higher--
this is log wages.
So when the yield are double, the wage is about 16% higher.
This is how we read this regression.
And what it shows is that when the elasticity is lower
in places, in areas where and period where
there is banking available.
So what this means is that in places where--
suppose there is a bank.
And when there is a bank, people can just borrow.
So you only have the direct effect
of the yield decrease on wages.
And then, compare that to a place where there is no bank.
In that case, you have that effect.
And in addition, you have the extra reinforcement effect
from the fact that everybody starts working together
when the wage is low.
So that shows that in places which have banks,
the wages is going to be less sensitive to variation
in the yield, because we don't have
that extra effect of everybody flooding the job market
and trying to get together precisely
when the opportunities are not great.
Yep?
STUDENT: Why are we using logs on this [INAUDIBLE]??
PROFESSOR: Log-log is something economists love.
Because when you regress the log of wage on the log of yield,
you can read the measure as an elasticity, which tells us
if the yield increased by 10%, the wage
will increase here by 1.6%.
So it makes it very easy to interpret what the changes
on guessing on graphics.
Whether or not that is in fact, the exact functional form
that the relationship between wage and yield follow,
it's not clear.
Maybe one should try to be a little bit more flexible
and see what is the best shape.
But I'm telling you as a matter of practice,
this is something people like in order
to recover directly on elasticity,
going from person to person.
Then whichever way, you then you can
talk about the yield of cotton and the yield of millet
in the same way.
It's unit free.
Elasticities are convenient that way.
Wages also become unit free.
It's not, the wages you can express in rupees or dollars.
Once you put in log-log, it's person to person.
It's unit free and very versatile measure.
Excellent question.
So that's an-- yes?
STUDENT: Yeah, so you mentioned at the beginning
that among the poor, there's a higher
prevalence of small business owners and things like that.
So I guess similar to increasing demand for labor,
do you ever see a case where there's
I guess, more businesses start, and it actually
helps the community and kind of spurs, I guess,
the local economy?
Or is that not a possible product risk?
PROFESSOR: When things don't go well,
or where you start a lot of business cropping up?
So, I don't know.
I haven't seen this study.
I could imagine that there are effects going both ways, which
is on the one hand.
For example, the wage worker loses their job,
so they need to do something.
So starting a small business is a way of buying yourself a job.
On the other hand, this is also not the time-- when
the conditions are low, it's not the time
where you can use part of your savings to buy a stock.
So I don't know which way it will--
and on the other hand, when conditions
are bad is also when some businesses are
going to go under.
So I don't know which way the balance goes.
It's a good question.

So this is what you do.
One strategy to prevent risk is OK, if there is a bad shocks,
you're going to try and work more.
The other thing you could do ex-ante,
and this is what Lucas was talking about,
is try to avoid risk.
So knowing that risk is ever present
and that would be very costly, the poor try to avoid it.
So for example, risk aversion, this aversion for risk
could lead people to avoid profitable, but risky
investment, for example, avoid to use new seeds that you need
to buy, and just use the seed that you already have
that are produced by the crop.
So that would prevent you to use hybrid seeds,
for example, which could be much more productive if they work.
But you would have lost all your investment if that didn't work.
Or you could diversify your portfolio of activities.
So each person in the family has several jobs.
And you could migrate for a short period of time
to create this--
not just by marriage, but also people
looking for jobs elsewhere when things go poorly.
And keep the rest of your family home
instead of moving everyone to the city, where maybe, that
would allow you to invest in a much better,
in looking for a much better job.
But moving the whole family is costly.
And then what if it doesn't work out, and so on and so forth.
So this is a way of reducing the risk
to always move by small periods of time, which is something we
see a lot of in poor countries.
So all these strategies are perfectly rational.
You would expect people to take them.
But of course, they contribute to maintain people in poverty,
because they prevent them to do what they would like
to do to maximize their income, and what they would do if they
thought they could be insured.
So I want to give you two examples.
One is agriculture and avoiding costly investment
in agriculture.
And the other is about migration and reluctance to migrate.