PROFESSOR: So what are the limits?
The first one is what economic jargons, we call moral hazard,
which is the idea that you cannot completely monitor what
people are doing on their farms.
So what if the income depends on the effort on the farm,
but other people cannot observe it?
So suppose for example, that it's
the case that how much you produce really
depends on your effort, and you're insured.
What's the danger?

Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] way you're going to get the income,
and you won't have to pay.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so the temptation,
if you know that people are going to help you anyways,
is to say, well, I'm going to do a little less.
But then, anticipating that, what
are other people going to do on their own field,
they are also going to do a little less.
And so now, everybody is going to do less.
And so everybody will have less money to share.
So you might end up being with less, so much less money
on average that even if it's less risky,
you're still down in term of welfare.

STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] negative monopoly?
PROFESSOR: That's called moral hazard.
STUDENT: What's that?
PROFESSOR: That is called moral hazard.
I never really understood what moral hazard means.
But it means that.
It means you have negative-- you have
perverse incentive in the process from the insurance.
So that's not ideal.
If worse comes to worse, you could find yourself
in a situation where people are--
nobody is doing anything.
And therefore, people are worse off
than they would be without the insurance.
So what could be the solution then, to avoid--
you could say, well no we are not going to work together.
And that's it.
But what would be an intermediate solution?
Yeah?
STUDENT: You can [INAUDIBLE],, only let people access
the insurance program once you know that they work--
the income from the farm, which is dependent on effort
certainly, it's certain amount.
So that you show that they're contributing, as well as taking
out the system.
PROFESSOR: So you could try and select
people, which have either less moral hazard,
or who are rich enough that the moral hazard is compensated
by the fact that they do enough.
That could be a possibility.
So then, some people are going to be left out of the scheme.
What would be another possibility?
Yes, Esther?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE],, some unavoidable into this,
that makes them, poor, but not like generally
covered to your everyday life.
So if you just need some [INAUDIBLE] for everything.
You have [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
So what you can do, what the insurance scheme could do
is to do something maybe similar to the weather insurance I
described, which is not insure you to reach you
to the level of income that you have achieved,
to make sure that it's always the same,
but to insure you when there is a shock that has happened
to you, that can be seen.
So for example, if your field was invaded by crickets,
there is nothing you can do against the crickets.
That's not something that's subject to moral hazard.
So if your field was invaded by crickets,
we'll come and help you out.
Or if you got sick, if you break your leg, obviously, it's
not your fault. It's not something
you brought onto yourself.
We'll come and help you out.
So we are going to insure you for that part of your income
process that is not under your control.
That's great.
So that's definitely a first thing you could do
or a second thing.
The first one is selection.
The second one is restricting the insurance
to observable sources of risk.
And what could be a third one, a little bit along the same idea?

Lucas?
STUDENT: You can see that It's not necessarily all distributed
equally.
It's like you pay in a certain percentage of what you get.
So it's still kind of dependent on your work.
If you make more, you get more.
But you [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
The third thing you can do a little bit along this line
is to say, well, we are going to provide you with insurance.
But we want to preserve the incentive.
So we're going to keep you holding a part of the risk.
So when you're doing poorly, we're going to give you some.
But that's not going to bring you to the average level.
And when you're doing well, we're
going to take some to redistribute to the people who
do poorly, but not everything.
And we can perhaps, pick a level of insurance that
creates a good balance between removing a part of the risk,
so you're not left with the entire risk.
That makes you unhappy.
And at the same time, leaving part of the risks because that
preserves the incentive that makes you work hard.
So in each of these three situation,
you're going to be in the same situation, which is insurance
is not going to be complete.
Either it is not going to touch everybody.
Some people are going to be entirely left out
of the scheme.
Or it's going to only cover risk, some kind of risks.
Or it's going to cover a variability of income
up to a point only.
That's the first problem.
The second problem, here is your second economic jargon
of the day is limited commitment.
Virginia?
STUDENT: So has there been studies
on how much of the insurance you need to have a stake in,
or how much of the pain you need to have a stake in
to work your hardest?
PROFESSOR: Yes, there are empirical studies of--
there are empirical studies of this type of topics,
in particular, trying to understand,
which is what you do observe in practice in villages
is imperfect insurance, and trying to understand
why the insurance is imperfect and the extent to which
it's responding to moral hazard and how much people need
to have a stake and so on.
Yeah, there is an empirical literature
that tries to get at that, it's difficult for the reason
that we're going to see in a minute, which
is many of the limit to insurance come
to the same conclusion, that insurance
is going to be limited.
And unlike happy families, which are all
the same and unhappy families, which
are different in all the ways, with insurance,
all the unhappy insurance arrangements
are pretty much partial insurance arrangement.
And it's extraordinarily subtle to distinguish,
possible, but subtle.
So and your question is one degree further.
STUDENT: Yes, what does the curve look like?
PROFESSOR: Yes, exactly.
So there are studies on that.
That's something that economists are very interested,
because economists love to study incentives and response
to perverse incentives.
So there are studies of that.
But a bit hard to get, but it's possible.
So, limited commitment-- so what's limited commitment?
So let's go back to a world where income is just exogenous.
So income is given to you.
There is no effort that you need.
So when you are doing well in a particular moment,
it is your turn to give money to the pool,
to give money to a friend.

At this point, what would be the foundation?

Yeah?
STUDENT: To keep the money instead of putting it back.
PROFESSOR: It's to keep the money instead
of putting it back in the pool.
So first of all, your income could be hidden, in which case,
you would just stash it.
Or even if your income is visible, you could say sorry,
I don't feel like it today.
And what prevents you to--
if you cannot hide your money, what prevents you to just say,
no, I won't give you money today?
I don't feel like it.
Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE].
PROFESSOR: Yeah, so that's what you could do.
So you could-- so what prevents you to succumb to your one
degree or one step above me, ahead
of me, what prevents you to succumb
to this temptation is that your friends are not
going to be happy.
So what they can do is to say, so for example, I
don't know if you cook together in dorms.
If the day where you turn to cook you
say you don't feel like it, then your cooking arrangement,
what's the first reaction of the cooking arrangement,
if you refused to cook the one day where
it's your night to cook?

Yeah?
STUDENT: It's like a warning.
PROFESSOR: They're like, you're really like,
don't do this again.
And they are a bit like, maybe you have to produce an excuse.
And there is some amount of social opprobrium.
That's fine.
And then if you again don't do it next time, it's your turn.

Yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] when everyone--
PROFESSOR: Yeah, they might say, sorry, you're
not part of the cooking arrangement anymore.
The deal of the cooking arrangement
is when it's your turn to cook, you cook.
So same thing with the informal insurance process.
There are only two things that--
nobody can put you in prison.
There is no network, there is no formal contract, or so on.
So all they can do is number one, they can be nasty to you.
Or they can be some social opprobrium.
And number two, they can kick you out.
So then, we are going to Virginia's point, which is OK,
so you could say, fine, I am happy.
I will just strikeout on my own.
So then what you're going to do is
to compare the value of staying in the scheme for the time,
for infinite amount of period potentially,
to the gain that you have today.
And we can see that there is a tension.
Because the more risk there is in the system,
the more valuable the arrangement is.
So people are more incentive to want to stay inside it.
But on the other hand, when it's very risky,
it's also when some people get super high realization.
And it's very tempting to stay.
So what will make this type of scheme explode
is number one, if people are very impatient.
Because then, the extra income they are getting today
is so valuable that it's tempting to just take
it and run away if people are impatient.
And the second thing is if they expect that someone else might
do that in the future.
So there is a bit of a chicken and egg
issue with going back to your cooking arrangement system.
If you think that tomorrow, the person who is in charge to cook
will also not cook, then you're saying,
well, that arrangement is not working very well.
So there is a possibility when perception goes badly
of the whole thing collapsing onto itself.
Similarly for social insurance arrangement,
if you anticipate that it's fragile, then it's fragile.
It's a self-fulfilling prophecy, that if nobody trusts
other people, then the value of behaving well
yourself is lower.
And therefore, you will behave less badly, and therefore,
not trusting people.
People behave in untrusting ways.
So you can have multiple equilibria, where
everybody trusts each other.
And the system work very well, and suddenly
collapse of this informal system.
And then here, if a bank arrive or a microfinance possibility
arrive suddenly, they make the value
of staying in the system a little less high,
because there is the possibility of insuring yourself
against the wrong thing.
If a road comes or you have the possibility of migrating,
and so it could be that introducing this option, which
gives you cover against the worst outcome
actually leads to the collapse of informal solidarity
arrangement.
Because they suddenly make the informal solidarity
arrangement less valuable.
And therefore, people who are doing well in a given day
might feel that they want to not do it.
Then again, you could solve the problem
by telling someone who is doing well
today, OK, from now on, don't give us too much.
Don't give us everything you have.
Give us just enough to make it worth it for you to stay.
And again, you notice that we have an imperfect insurance,
incomplete insurance, because those who are doing well,
it is not at all because of the moral hazard thing.
But those who are doing well end up
keeping more, so that they can feel it
valuable to stay in the system.
So for a completely different reason than moral hazard,
you again, end up with insurance that
will look pretty incomplete.
Now, that's a second way of having,
a second element to insurance.
Insurance also becomes limited when
people can hide their income, because then they
don't give it away.
So you need to have schemes that leaves a sufficient stake
in for people to declare how much income they haven't shared
it.