
PROFESSOR: Reasons why people are going to incompletely pool
their incomes within villages.
But in addition, even if they were able to completely pool
the income within villages, that's
not going to provide them full cover
against risk because a part of the risk is aggregate.
So if you take, for example, the weather.
People share the same weather.
That doesn't mean that the weather has
the same effect on everyone.
Some people might have fields that are more sloppy
or different type of soil, and so
there is still some residual differences between people
within the same village, but there is still a lot
of the risk that is common.
So to go back to Darren's definition of IED,
the stock within the village might have a very strong
common component.
And just one IED error added on top
of that, that might be responsible for only 10% or 20%
of the overall viability of the income.
In that case, they can be insured,
their informal insurance arrangement
is going to insure them for this part,
for this residual risk that's not common to everyone, that's
not aggregate to the village, but they're
going to be left holding the risk of the aggregate shock.
So that's a problem.
So there is potentially quite limited scope for insurance.
And this scope might become even more limited by the fact
that moral hazard, for example, may
be bigger among people who don't know each other very well.
So people will tend to form insurance arrangement
with close neighbors or with families,
and therefore they will have even more correlated shock.
So the fact that you have moral hazard
limited commitment trust, needing to trust people,
and so on reduces the set of people
with whom you can form an insurance arrangement,
and it reduces in a way that is actually
going in the direction of limiting the scope that we have
for insurance in the first place.

So that's-- another problem is that not only people have
aggregate shocks, but because in social networks they are depend
on each other, the shocks might also propagate through
the network.
So, for example, during the financial-- during the COVID
crisis, there was these articles coming
about how when one business closes,
all the people who were dependent on this business also
closed.
So people in a social network are also
in a production network together,
they are buying from each other, working for each other,
and so on.
So not only there is aggregate shocks
because we share a common shock, but precisely because we
are a social network, which allows
us to form the insurance, we have this web of relationship,
we also have a propagation of the shocks
that are coming to this economic relationship
between each other.
So all of that means that almost by construction,
informal insurance is going to leave people with a lot of--
with a lot of risk to hold.

Then there are also issues.
So some of this, by the way, is not fixed over time.
Some of this can be improved and can
be improved by technologies.
For example, in many African countries
now in particular all over East Africa,
there is access to mobile money on people's telephone.
So a lot of people have access to this account where
they can quite easily send each other money by the phone,
even to long distance, which didn't
use to be the case before.
So what this has meant is that this has really allowed people
to form insurance relationships in places where they were--
where they might have uncorrelated stock.
For example, before if your son went to the city
or if your cousin went to the city, they were in the city,
but you would have-- they only would
have to come every six months or so to bring back money.
And so you couldn't really rely on their income
to provide insurance against what
was happening in the village.
And likewise, it was hard for you
to give them money in case something went poorly for them.
But now with M-PESA, M-PESA is the way
that this system is called in Kenya, people,
for example, who have a son in the city
or even a village member in the city,
can send money through their phone
when things are going badly in the village and good for them,
or can receive money on his phone
while he is, for example, in between jobs.
So [INAUDIBLE] in the Sloan School
as shown that the introduction of M-PESA
via the diffusion of the agents that
are able to offer these processes
has allowed people to diversify their informal insurance
networks and has improved the informal insurance situation
tremendously because people are not anymore
constrained to form insurance between a group of people
who share a lot of aggregate shocks.
So that's an example of these things actually improving.