
PROFESSOR: Another thing that is worth highlighting
is that risk causes a lot of stress, of course, both when
people experience it, and maybe even when people anticipate
that things might go poorly.
And first of all, it's not good for your health
to be constantly stressed.
When people are stressed out, they
generate a hormone called cortisol, which
is a fight or flight response that's evolutionarily suitable,
like if you see a lion, you should be very stressed.
And your adrenaline should go up,
you should start pumping a lot of blood,
and you should run away very fast.
So that's why when we get stressed, if you have ever been
stressed, you see you feel hot.
And your heart beats faster.
And you have physical manifestation of the stress.
That's caused by this extent of increased cortisol.
Now, this is good.
We need it to be particular, to have this heightened
attention and physical capacity when we are stressed.
Because it's how we respond to danger.
But some people have suggested that the cortisol itself might
affect decision-making ability, that the cortisol itself
might make people a little confused in making decisions.
This is still [INAUDIBLE],, but it is something
that has been demonstrated.

But something that has been shown
is that when what's called the scarcity problem or the packing
problem, which is when people feel very concerned
about, whether about a financial problem,
they became extraordinarily focused on getting
this financial problem fixed.
And it becomes more difficult for them
to think about other things.
So this is an hypothesis that was put forward in particular,
by Sendhil Mullainathan and Eldar Shafir in a book called
Scarcity.
And the anecdote or the analogy they gave
is to packing a suitcase.
So when you're trying to pack a suitcase
to go on vacation, if you have a very big suitcase,
you can think about everything you
need to put in it without being worried about that.
It will fit.
If you have a small suitcase, the packing problem
becomes more difficult and it gets hard to get it right.
So you're making a mistake within the packing problem.
So how does that translate in term of people being--
decision making when people are poor?
So here is an experiment that was
done in Trenton, New Jersey.
They go to a mall and they're asking people
to think about it.
They just collect people in the mall and say, hey,
would you like to participate into a small research project?
And they ask them what is their income,
in general, how much they made last week, for example.
Then they ask them to think about, just think about,
imagine that your car gets broken.
And you go to the garage.
And for some people, it's a small problem,
like a $50 problem.
And for some people, it's a big problem, a $2,000 problem.
Think about the randomized debt.
And then they said, imagine you have this problem.
I think about how you would fix it.
Where would you find the money?
Would you decide to-- would you actually fix the car?
Do you have insurance, et cetera.
So they asked people have to think about this situation
and write down what they would do
in response to this $50 problem or this $2,000 problem.
And then right after that, they make
them solve IQ-type puzzles.
And what they find is that for rich people,
it doesn't matter if they had to think
before about a small problem or a big problem.
They just do their IQ puzzles the same.
For poor people, if they had to solve a small problem,
their IQ is just as high as that of rich people.
But if they had to think about a big problem,
suddenly their measured IQ becomes much lower.
So obviously, it's not that they become less intelligent.
So basically, by the way, this puts
a lot of doubt on measures of IQ or various kinds,
because this shows that it's very responsive to feature
of the environment, and they are not
deep measures of who you are.
But what this suggests is that for poor people having
to think hard about a money problem has basically
taken away all the bandwidth they
had for this kind of intellectual hard things.
And they don't have enough energy left
to think about the IQ problem.
So in the same way, of course, this is just about lab issues.
This is about doing IQ tests.
Maybe it's not so important in life,
maybe they would be able to do something else better.
But it at least, raises the possibility that the stress,
the income stress takes so much space in people's brain,
that it just makes it difficult for them
to think about all the other important decisions
that they have to take in their life that we've discussed,
for example, health care decision, education
decision, and so on.
We're going to talk more about that
when we talk about psychology and development
in lecture later of the semester with Frank.
But I wanted to mention it here because that shows
the importance of risk, not just as oh, it's kind of sad,
but that risk interact with being poor
can potentially create these long-term damaging impact
of temporary bad situation.
STUDENT: Do you know the elasticity number?
Like I'm curious if the cortisol, [INAUDIBLE]??
PROFESSOR: Yes, so the cortisol link is a little bit--
it's not fully established yet, as far as I can tell.
Income to cortisol is clear.
You do have a pretty strong reaction.
You can measure cortisol.
And it reacts, definitely reacts to periods of shocks.
And what has not been so conclusively proven
is that cortisol, that elevated cortisol
does blur decision making.

The scarcity thing, the fact that in period
of income stress, you make worse decision,
regardless of whether it's cortisol or something else.
For example, there's just the fact
that there's only so many stressful things we can think
about in one time, is something you'll see much more
about in the later lectures.
But all of that is to say, well risk
is pretty fundamental in the lives of the poor.
The poor are exposed to so much more risk than we are.
And in addition, the risk is more
damaging in the poor person's life.