PROFESSOR: Today we are going to talk about risk and insurance.

So why talk about risk?
Risk is a central element of the life of the poor.
50% of the urban global poor run an agricultural--
run a non-agricultural business.
And 30-98% of the rural poor have a farm,
so they run a business, too, depending
on the country we looked at.
Those who don't have a business also bear some risks.
Of course if you run a business, you run all the risk.
If the prices go up, you make less profit.
If demand goes down, you make less sales.
Even those who don't have a business
are often in very risky situations
because they don't have a salary that pays them a regular wage.
Instead, they are working on a daily basis.
So they can easily lose their job.
And even if they don't lose their job,
their wage could be set on a day by day.
So the wage volatility is much higher in poor countries
than it is in rich countries.
So to give you an example from work by [INAUDIBLE],,
you can see that the richer the country--
this data is a little bit aged.
This is data from for the '80s, but it's still true today.
The richer the countries and the smaller the wage variability.
So what's the wage variability?
It's the day to day fluctuation in how much you're paid.
So of course, if you're paid monthly, that's much stability.
But more broadly from mostly people's wage stay the same
or it only goes up.
And in fact, in rich countries which
are very much downward rigid, so they almost never go down.
And if anything, go up.
So that's the first aspect of volatility.
Of course, we know from watching the news lately
that food prices are also highly volatile.
These days they are particularly high.
If we look at the global food prices,
the food prices have gone up tremendously in '21 and again
in 2022.
So that creates a new source of risk,
both on the farmer side because when it's low
and their product are not so valuable,
but particularly on the consumer side
because when prices are high, your money goes
a little less far.
And the thing is, food prices are
high in developing countries because they reflect
very high input costs, in particular,
the cost of fertilizer, which is mainly made
of energy and therefore, in a sense, oil.
So the fertilizer price very closely track
the prices of oil.
And therefore, the input prices have gone up
very much, which is one reason why
the food prices have gone up.
So the farmers are not better off
because the food prices are high.
But the consumers are worse off.
And everybody else is poorer when the food prices are high.
In fact, so the FAO is trying to estimate
how many people at any given point in time
are undernourished or are on the border of starvation.
It's not starvation, but people who are close to that.
And after tremendous progress until roughly the pandemic,
where we see the number of people who are undernourished
going down and down every year, there
has been an increase since the pandemic, which
has continued very much with the war in Ukraine
and the increase in the food prices.
These are probably the type of risk
that you're more accustomed to hear
about when we think about the life of the poor
and the variability of their lives.
But really, it goes on top of a life that
normally is pretty risky.
You are at risk of bad weather, a poor monsoon and your harvest
is gone.
For example, it was very hot in India last June and May.
Conversely, it's flooded in Pakistan.
Of course, there is a direct impact
of the floods on people's lives.
But it is also impact on the harvest and their businesses
and so on.
So there is a variability of environment.
There is the variability of global food prices.
There is a variability of demand, global demand
or local demand for various goods.
And unlike people in richer countries that
are, to some extent, protected, the poor
just get hit by that directly.
So what does it do in--
what does this type of shock--
how does it interact with the poverty trap
argument we listen to?
So if you read the chapter on risk and insurance in the book,
you would have heard about this woman, [INAUDIBLE],,
who has a clothing business.
And a small business of making clothes
is very much an estuary business.
Why?
Because basically every time you reach a new threshold,
you could become more productive and do more.
So for example, you could start by just sewing stuff yourself.
And then if you have enough money,
you can jump a step with a fixed investment,
buy a sewing machine, and have a slightly bigger business.
And then there might be another step where
you can buy a second machine, or you can buy an iron
or you can move to different premises
so you can hire more workers.
So each of these things create a jump
in the production function, which is a bit akin to--
which is a bit akin to a ship, where
you have a part of the production that's just not
very, very productive.
Here I wrote it concave, as we had in the ship.
But it could even be like this.
And then suddenly you have a big jump.
If you manage to invest enough, suddenly you do more.
So what happened to her is that she was doing pretty well.
She was on the right side of the intersection.
And then there was a theft.
So this sets her back so much that then she
isn't able to accumulate enough to put her business back
in the trajectory that it was before.
So to buy a second sewing machine,
you need to accumulate enough to make this big, large investment
or to move places, similarly.
So if you are not able to do that, then you might,
your business might remain very small.
And you're simply not earning enough to make it worthwhile
and to go above the sort of subsisting
level of the business.
So in the s-shaped world, this uncertainty
that the risks are facing can not only just
create fluctuation in how well they
are doing at the point in time, but this fluctuation
can have a permanent impact.
And it's definitely something that many economists worried
about in the context of the COVID-19 crisis,
is that not only you would find people temporarily
poor because they had to shut down their business
during the lockdowns.
But many of those people who have
to shut down their business temporarily
will never be able to climb back because it's
kind of a lucky strike that allowed
them to be above the threshold of the poverty trap.
So this remains to be seen whether the economy
and the individual trajectory post COVID-19
recover quickly or not, because COVID-19 has immediately
be followed by other economic shocks, which
have so far prevented anybody from really catching up.
So that is the first.
That is one way in which this riskiness overlaps with level
of why risk is not only the poor are exposed to more risk,
but they are exposed to risk in settings which make themselves
already different from what we experience in richer countries.
Another way and where it might become--
where it can become pretty dramatic
is that when things go poorly, you
might find yourself in a situation
where you don't have enough to invest
in everyone, to feed everyone.
So when things go very poorly for you,
when there is a very big negative shock,
you lose your job or the harvest is bad,
nobody needs someone to help them work in the field.
And you need suddenly in the S-shape world
it could be that it makes if you were
to spread equally the resources in the family,
nobody would have enough.
So you choose to concentrate whatever
little you have on some people.
And then some people in a household
find themselves completely abandoned.
So evidence of that--
there are two studies, at least, to show some evidence of that.
One is an older study that looks at the impact of bad rainfall
years on girls' survival.
And it shows that in good rainfall years--
this is in India--
where the monsoon has been good, harvest is good,
boys and girls have just the same chance
to survive past their first year.
But if a girl is born just before a bad rainfall year,
they are less likely--
she is less likely to survive than her brother or another boy
in another family.
Because in good years, people would kind of
like to feed everyone.
But when things become very tight,
they make a choice that goes towards the boys.
So the discrimination gets accentuated in bad years.
So it's another way in which the risk that the poor experience
sort of accentuate bad situations.
It makes them even worse.
Another example of that is a paper about Tanzania
that shows that in drought years older women in villages
are more likely to be called witches.
And of course, this could be because people
feel that, indeed, there has to be an explanation
for this bad situation.
And you try to look for a scapegoat.
But when you think about it, that's
a pretty convenient scapegoat.
Because maybe the older women are not
the one who are the most productive in the economy.
So normally you would feed them.
But in bad years, they become too
hard to sustain for their families or for the village.
So they are cast away as witches.
And in fact, this paper, which is a paper by Edward Miguel,
shows that the witches are often denounced.
The people who are calling someone a witch
are often people from their own family,
who are the ones who are feeding them,
who are the ones who said this she must be the witch.
So just two example about how this risk overlays
with s-shaped curve, either to have
permanent impact of temporary shocks,
or this unequal sharing of poverty that
accentuates existing discrimination in households.