PROFESSOR: All right, so what is insurance?
So let's talk first about informal insurance, which
is what people can do between themselves without having
access to a bank or an insurer.

So imagine two farmers, Ahmad and Bijou.
And they grow crops.
And they have an ID process.
And their income can be either high or low,
both with probability 0.5.
And then they can come into--
so if they don't share, their income
are going to be either high or either low.
But they can come into an agreement,
where, when Ahmad is high and Bijous is low, they share
or vice versa.
So now you could have with probability 0.5,
they have the average income, which was not available to them
before.
Which probability-- so the average between high and low,
with probability 1/4, they have low.
And with probability 1/4, they have high.
So obviously, income is not coming from elsewhere.
So the average income they're receiving over a period of time
is always going to be the same as they had
before, 0.5 high times 0.5 low.
But is their welfare higher once they've
entered that arrangement?
You have a guess?
STUDENT: Yes.
So because you probably-- because there's less marginal
benefit for every additional dollar earned.
The difference-- even if the monetary value
is the same between low and average and average and high,
you'd much rather make the transition from low to average
than you would from average to high.
Because that means you're not missing meals,
rather than you get to buy [INAUDIBLE]..
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So one way to think about it is that your utility function
is a concave function of how much money you have.
Because you really don't like to have nothing
or to have very little.
So the marginal effect of $1 on your welfare
is higher at low level than at high level.
So we could draw the curve like this as a concave curve.
Before they entered in the insurance,
they had either the low point or the high point.
And now, from time to time, half the time,
they have the medium point.
And because your curve is like an arc and the--
in the without insurance, their utility
is the average of the high and the low.
So it's on the bow of the arc.
Whereas if they can now share their utilities, from time
to time, on the arc itself.
So it is higher than being on the bow of the arc.
And if it's many of them who enter into this arrangement,
then they are basically-- they are able to be always
at the average.
Because between all of them decided process average,
they always get the utility of the average.
And the utility of the average is on the arc
as opposed to being on the string that is between the two.
And therefore, it's higher.
So that's the advantage of an informal insurance arrangement.
Even two people can do better by sharing risks
than staying separate.
So this is something that people have long
suspected was going on, that people in a village
would, in this way, share risk.
And we have examples in history of mutual assistance society.
But a paper by Chris Udry in the early 1990s
was the one that really showed a very concrete example of how
this works in practice.
So he actually, when he was a graduate student,
PhD student in economics, he spent a year in Nigeria.
And he interviewed people all the time.
Like he went and interviewed, went to one particular village.
And he interviewed people every month.
And every time he asked them who they given money to
and who they are receiving money to,
and what he found there is a very dense network of loans,
so what people describe as loan.
But what you noticed is that these are not
loans in the strict sense of the term.
In that, when you do badly, then you
don't have to reimburse your loan.
And it's not treated as a default. But when you do well,
you reimburse more.
And moreover, when your lender does badly,
you reimburse more to them.
So that's not your traditional home mortgage.
How much you're paying on your mortgage
doesn't depend on whether Bank of America or whoever
gave you the mortgage is doing.
It depends on what you owe them.
So in a typical loan situation, the payment
is only contingent on the history.
And they're giving you money in the past.
You need to give it to them now according to the schedule
of the contract.
And the contracts are not indexed
on how much you're making or whether you've
lost your job or whatnot.
Whereas here, they call these things loans.
But for example, someone is never called--
someone-- what they call a default
is if someone has money but doesn't reimburse.
If someone doesn't have money and, therefore, they
don't give you any money back, it's not a default.
So this suggests that these loans operate
very much as is when things go well for,
you give money into the pool.
And when you-- so it's one mechanics
of making this work pool.
So this shows, for example, how much is paid in interest rate.
So if the borrower doesn't have a shock,
they're paying 20% in interest.
If they don't have-- if they have a shock,
they pay nothing that month or, in fact, a negative interest
potentially.
If they don't have a shock, they're repaying after 67 days.
If they have a shock, 72 days.
On the lender side, if your lender doesn't have a shock,
you don't give them more.
You give them less.
But if they have a shock, you give them more.
So that's the part that is funny.
That I mean, that kind of shows that it's
a system of transaction that has an insurance purpose.
It is how much you're repaying to your lender
depends on the state of the lender and not just
the state of you.
So that's a very interesting setup.
That's an example.
There have been other examples.
There is a very celebrated paper by Rob Thompson, who
is my colleague in the department, that
shows that people's consumption is much less
volatile in a village than their income
and is, instead of being just correlated
with their own income, is correlated
with the impact of everyone else in the village at the time.
So it's another example of showing basically
of this that you basically get the average of the village
instead of getting just your own shock.
STUDENT: This is a bit of a side question.
But do you know who first implemented formal insurance?
PROFESSOR: No, I don't know who implemented
first formal insurance.
You can imagine that this always-- you
could imagine that there were all
in the first hunting-gathering societies
started doing it already.
I mean, this is something which someone doesn't
have to come up with the idea.
Or this is something that probably evolved
as we evolved as societies.
Yeah.
It's not implemented by someone outside of the village.
This is entirely informal web of, in this case,
entirely informal web of relations.
And the structure that it takes, so at a conceptual level,
is we are putting the money together.
And we are sharing it.
The form that it takes vary from place to place.
So in the [INAUDIBLE] case, it's entirely
decentralized by this set of bilateral loans.
In other settings, for example, one
of my very first trip to developing countries, I was 18.
And I went to Madagascar.
And I was kind of just hanging out with the local NGO there.
And what they were--
what people were doing in the village
is that they were putting rice into literally a basket,
like a big thing, a big storage facilities.
Whenever they had extra rice, it went
into that storage facility.
And then they got it from it when they needed money.
So that was another way of implementing
the same pooled system.
So the different ways of implementing
these informal solidarity are probably
as varied as the number of villages in the world
or something like that.
So what's differently?
It is happening.
You also, of course, see that within extended families.
When there is a health shock, people
will help out and spring up for these health shocks.
When someone is unemployed, they can maybe
move into their relative's and so on.
So that's something that you do find in formal--
in both poor and richer countries.
But there are a number of limits to this informal insurance
schemes related to the fact that the contracts are
written nowhere.
And the enforcement capacities are pretty limited.
You can't call the police on your borrower
if they refuse to give you more on their informal loan
when you're not doing well.
