PROFESSOR: But the problem is that nobody wants it.
So even though it's the ideal product,
it's not one that anybody is interested in buying.
At some point in the sort of social business circle,
it was all the rage.
People were coming up with different products
based on satellite.
And so this, that, and the other.
But basically, it's not something
that anybody ever really bought at full price.
So why is that?
So actually, why is that?
You have suggestion before I put on the slides?

Why would people not buy this type of thing,
either the simple health insurance or simple weather
insurance?
Someone is clearly willing to buy it, to offer it to them.
Yeah, Christine?
STUDENT: Because if you buy a product,
you have to mean that something bad is going to happen to you.
And so, if they buy it, but nothing bad happens to them,
then they feel like they're losing money.
PROFESSOR: Yes, great.
So number one, it's something that happens in the future.
And in addition, it's something bad
that you don't like to think about.
And we don't really like to think ahead
about negative events.
For example, in South Africa burial expenditure are huge.
When people die, whoever stayed must do this huge ceremony
and so on.
And there exists burial insurance.
But nobody buys it.
And presumably, you're going to die.
That's a known fact.
But people don't like to.
So it's not even much risk that you
should get burial insurance.
Whenever that happens, your relative
will be spared the huge financial cost
that it is to bury someone, but yet, people
don't do it, presumably because they
don't like to think about the fact
that they are going to be dead.
I can understand that.
So that's a great point.

What else could it be?
Yeah?
STUDENT: Yeah, I think that's an example of loss aversion.
Because if something bad happens to you circumstantially
and you pay, maybe this is totally a fantasy.
But maybe you think it's external.
And then if you pay because you entered this deal
and you did well, then that's like--
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So the loss aversion will sometime
prevent you to buy the insurance.
Because you're paying.
You're doing something when things are well for you,
you're paying a premium.
And then most of the time, things turn out fine.
And then you lose your money.
And people don't like that.
Compared to a loan, where you take money and you reimburse
or savings, where if you put your money into the bank
account, it's there when you come back,
unless something really bad happened to the bank.
With insurances, most of the time,
you don't recover your premium.
And because of the loss aversion,
some people don't like that.
Great, what else?

Izine?
STUDENT: Is it the lack of social proof?
There's clearly a demand for insurance,
because they have it amongst themselves, almost kind.
But maybe just because they're not
the same type of credibility that they're used to seeing.

PROFESSOR: Absolutely.
There could be mistrust.
And you really need to trust your insurer.
Because most of the time you give them money,
and they don't give it back to you.
And if you ever have experienced any problem in your house
or in your car, you know that every time you
try to get the insurance back, there is this argument,
whether you're going to be repaid or not.
And so, if you don't really trust the insurer
to do this fairly and you're thinking they're big
and I'm small and they are going to mistreat me,
then you might be very reluctant.
So I've worked on the evaluation or an attempt
at evaluating, I guess, a successful attempt to evaluate
a health insurance product that was given by a Microcredit
organization to their employee and to their client.
And they didn't want it.
And in the first few villages, they were incidents.
It was just an hospitalization insurance,
in-network hospitalization insurance.
So many people try to get-- they went to the wrong hospital,
so they couldn't actually use the insurance.
Then someone died, but they had not gone to the insurance.
So their relatives didn't get any money,
even though they had spent a lot on health care.
And they had died.
So they, in fact, were sick, but they were not hospitalized.
So in these two incidents, people didn't get paid.
So that got everybody extraordinarily suspicious
of the insurance.
So everybody refused to take the scheme.
And they all left Microcredit, as a result.
Not all, but something like 30% of clients
just left the Microcredit organization
to not have to buy the insurance.
This is how much they hated it.
And so, that's very much related to this mistrust argument.
Angela?
STUDENT: You just might have other, more urgent things
to think about.
It's not something-- not only do you not
want to think of something negative,
but you might just not really have the mental space for that.
[INAUDIBLE] training and taking care of your kids.
And it's a problem for another day until it's too late.
PROFESSOR: Yes, so independent of the fact
that you don't like to think about negative things, just
a regular or time-inconsistent preferences
would mean that you don't think about the future so much.
And insurance is very much preventive that way.
Samantha?
STUDENT: I'm kind of going off that as well,
just people wanting to spend their money in a different way.
I know we saw people weren't spending as much on food,
or even trying to buy like luxury goods like a TV
when they might not even have money for that.
So if you're not spending money on food probably
when you need it, why would you pay for insurance and things?
People just want a whole lot a lot of money.
Then people might try to put that little bit of extra money
they have.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, there is a lot of other things
that people have to take care of.
And that might not be one of them.
So I think I have everything here.
So lack of understanding of how insurance work,
mistrust, difficulty to think ahead about a negative event
or something in the future.
And also, because the product have
to be so simple from the point of view of the insurer,
it means that from the point of view of the people,
it's actually very--
it's full of holes.
It doesn't cover everything that needs to be covered.
Go back to my health insurance example.
It only covers you as some hospital
and for some conditions and to a point.
And it's hard to understand when you even qualify.
So this is a national hospitalization insurance
scheme in India that's subsidized by the government.
A research team subsidized it even further.
And then they're looking at the effect
of insurance enrollment on use of insurance when you're sick.
And you can see that in the last six months,
the people who are enrolled for insurance are only 4%
more likely to use insurance than the people who are not
enrolled.
And there is a little bit of spillover, but not much.
And then, 4% of them tried to use the insurance and failed.
And then six months later, 3% have succeeded.
Nobody has succeeded for the most serious events.
And about 3% of them have failed to use it,
tried but failed to use it for the most serious events.
So the product end up being extraordinarily complicated
to use.
And that's one reason people don't want it.
And in fact, when people experience insurance
and when they have a success with insurance,
meaning something happened to them and they get a payout,
so this is in villages, where insurance
was given to them for free.
This is a weather insurance in China.
You can see that if they get a payout in one year,
they are more likely to buy the insurance again
the following year.
So successful insurance, success does
lead to people understanding what the scheme is.
And then they buy it again.
So in this particular experiment,
they had subsidized for one year.
Regardless of whether people are subsidized or not,
they are more likely to take it again if they had a good shock.
But people were much more likely to actually have insurance
if they were subsidized.
So the early experience helped them get--
the early subsidy helped get them
experience with the product.

So the complication is that the markets are
limited in what they can offer.
And it's limited precisely in the ways
that makes what it can offer attractive to people.
It can only provide very simple things, very restrictive
things, but that's not what people-- people feel, oh, I
bought insurance to have less risk.
And what you give me is a sort of lottery ticket,
where sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't.
And it feels like adding risks to risk.
So in this context--
and this is the last slide for today, what's
the role for public policy?
The obvious role is to complement the market
to ensure social protection against health shock,
against weather shock, against other source of income
variability, and ensure everyone a minimum standard of living,
which could take several forms.
It could take food aid.
It could be cash transfers.
So for example, this ties to discussion
about universal basic income.
But think of it as universal ultra basic income,
which is always step in when people are at starvation.
It could be in the form of universal free coverage
for basic health care, publicly provided
insurance that again, is complete and free and costless
for basic care.
And for other things--
so you could subsidize people to get rid
of the worst kind of risk.
And for the rest, people could have the option
to buy extra insurance if they wanted.
And there, you could subsidize the private insurance
for a period of time, for people to understand and learn
how this thing work over time.
And this last experiment suggests
that it might be successful.


The car repair experiment provided evidence that…



Poverty can cause stress.

Stress can cause poverty.

The poor have more stressful lives.

The poor can better handle stress, since they’re used to it.


True or false? One reason people don’t migrate as a way to cope with risk because people also face risk when migrating



True

False


How might social networks interact with aggregate shocks? Select all that apply.



Social networks can increase the risk of aggregate shocks because if your business relies on transactions within your social network, and if your insurance relies on informal borrowing within your social network, any shock could propagate throughout the network.

Social networks can increase the risk of aggregate shocks because they provide data that is used to train algorithms that banks rely on to make lending decisions.

Now that mobile money has made it easier for your social network to spread out across many locations, social networks can decrease the risk of an aggregate shock.

Social networks could increase the risk of aggregate shocks if they contribute to the spread of misinformation that can hurt the like-minded people in that network exposed to it by leading them to make bad decisions.
