PROFESSOR: So for agriculture the example I want to give you
is a study by [? Dean ?] [? Karlan ?] and [? Chris ?]
[? Udry ?] in Ghana.
They were marketing a simple weather insurance program.
I'll describe to you why the weather insurance programs are
so simple that exist in the world ,
but we'll do that just a little later in the lecture.
Now, for now, it's sufficient that I describe to you
what the program is.
So what the program is is that if the water--
if the rainfall falls below a certain level,
I'm paying you some amount of money
that's a function of how much insurance you've purchased.
So for example, you look at the size of your field,
you buy $1,000 worth of insurance.
If the rainfall at the nearby weather station
falls below some level, I give you $10 per $1,000 your bought,
or $100 per $1,000 you bought--
whatever the right ratio is.
So that's very, very simple.
It doesn't involve any visit by the insurance person
to your house to verify damage.
You're going to get paid regardless
if the weather falls below a threshold,
and you're not going to be paid if the weather is not
above the threshold, even if you are still doing poorly.
You could be doing poorly for some other reason.
For example, it could rain too much,
and then you're not covered by that because this is a drought
program.
So that's the structure of this program.
For a reason that will also explain a little later
in more detail, these products are not particularly popular.
They are not even popular at all.
So this product, the actually fair price of this product
is 9.5 cedis per acre.
So for one acre of land, you would purchase--
it would cost 9.5 Ghana cedis.
What does it mean, the actually fair?
Do you know?
We could try and guess it if you don't know for a fact.
Olivia?
STUDENT: I guess that's what it would cost for them to actually
pay out on the insurance.
PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly.
It's on average the insurance neither loses nor gains money.
So in an instance, they will always
charge you a bit more than what's actually fair
because they need some small change
to operate the insurance--
pay salaries, and profits, and so on.
But so this is the actually fair, 9.5.
At 9.5 Ghana cedis, not very many people want it.
Less than half people want it.
So what they do is that they go to farmers,
and they offer this insurance at different prices
to see how much people want it.
And so one first point, which we'll elaborate in more detail
a little later, is that people don't really want it.
But that gives you a chance for a simple experiment,
which is, well, what about I offer it to you for free?
Then people are like, sure, I'll take it free if it's free.
So what they do in their city is they offer it
at these different prices, from 14 cities,
to which would be the full cost with profit and from 2 to 0.
And at 0, they have a take-up of 100%, versus 40% at 9.5 cedis.

Then, what they do is that they look at what farmers
do once they have insurance.
Since they randomly offer the insurance for 0,
they can compare.
You're much more likely to be insured if you were
offered the insurance for zero.
So we can see whether, on average, the people who
are in this group where they got it for free
behave differently than the people who had to pay for it.
Very few of them ended up actually paying for it.
What do we find--
or, what do they find?
Looking at, so they have-- this is their first treatment,
the insurance treatment.
They also offer a loan for people to buy inputs,
and then they offer both together.
And what they find for spending on fertilizer
is that if they offer together a loan which
makes it possible for people to purchase inputs
and the insurance program, they get
a 47% increase in spending on fertilizer
relative to the control group.
If they offer only insurance, they don't find an effect--
presumably because people cannot afford it.
But interestingly, if they offer people a loan--
so enough money to afford it--
people also don't take it up.
People also do not.
So people need both credit and insurance
to be willing to invest in chemical fertilizer.
So they need to know presumably, if, one, they
don't have insurance, they don't want
to engage in risky strategies that
are profitable in the short--
in the longer run, but with a chance that
it doesn't work out.
So of course, I haven't showed you.
I haven't showed you yet that, in fact, it is profitable.
So in fact these are mostly subsistence farmers,
so the notion of predictable predictability or profitability
is not that they are making more money;
it's that they have enough food.
There is more food for their household.
And indeed, they find that the households that
were given credit and insurance are
43% less likely to report that they have missed
a meal in the previous year.
It only happened to 12% of them versus 21% of them
in the control group.
So having access to this insurance gives them
the possibility to--
they need both the insurance and the credit.
But having access to the insurance and the credit
gives them the possibility to invest
in better agriculture, more productive
agricultural practices, and to feed their family better.
And this is a setting where there was no shock,
so it's not the direct effect of the money
once there was a shock.
Eventually, there was no shock, so nobody got a payout.
But it's ex ante, knowing that this risk is there,
that leads you to take this very careful strategy that ends up
lowering your income.