PROFESSOR: So as a result, one could
imagine that they would spend a lot of effort
trying to cope with risk.
So a first way to cope with risk would be to save and borrow.
What are other ways-- which we are going to see a bit later.
So the first thing you could do to avoid income risk
or to mitigate income risk is to put money--
save for a rainy day, or in this case,
usually save for a dry day.

Or to borrow when things are going poorly.
What other things could you do?
STUDENT: They have multiple sources of income [INAUDIBLE]
PROFESSOR: Yes.
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] some mechanical--
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So you could engage in risk reduction strategies.
Having many, many jobs is one of them.
So there is always something that basically you
create your own portfolio of activity in the same way
that if you're investing in a stock market,
you shouldn't pick one, you should have a portfolio.
You can try and reproduce that at the level of activities.
What else could you do to cope with risk?
Olivia?
STUDENT: Like the strategic marriages,
that they have other families they can depend on.
PROFESSOR: Right.
And so that's an example of--
an extreme, perhaps, example of what strategy or implication?
STUDENT: A diversification--
PROFESSOR: That's a diversification of what--
he was mentioning--
Luke was mentioning the diversification of activities,
and you're talking about the diversification of trading
partners, which assumes something, which is true,
but I would like you to spell out.
STUDENT: Like [INAUDIBLE]?
PROFESSOR: Or the ability to either borrow
or exchange or something like that with a social network.
So basically, another way that you can deal with risk
is by having insurance, including insurance
by having informal relationship with many people
in a social network.
Could be people from your village
or it could be people in your extended family.
And this paper by Mike [? Rosenzweig ?]
showed that people are trying to marry their daughters far away
so that the daughters are married
into a family where the rainfall follows a different pattern.
So if they are doing poorly, you're doing well,
you're doing poorly, they're doing well,
and therefore, you can help each other out
to these bonds of marriage, which
makes this poor family behave a bit like king and queens
of the yesteryears who were trying
to form the right alliance to help each other when they had
problems.
So those-- so this is the social network and informal insurance
through the social network.
What's another form of insurance people could potentially get?

What do you have for--
in case you have health shocks, do your parents pay for it?

Yeah?
STUDENT: Buy insurance?
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So if you have a health shock, your parents
don't actually pay for it.
You are presumably on your parents' insurance.
So people have-- so in richer countries
and perhaps also in poorer countries--
that's what we are going to talk about, there is not
only informal insurance, but potentially
formal insurance, health insurance, weather
insurance, car insurance, something like that-- a web
of formal insurance.
So those are all the strategies that people
could employ in order to limit the risk that they face.
So what I want to do in the rest of today
is to go a little bit over this different strategy
and seeing how effective they are.
Angela?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] putting assets in general
so you can try to accumulate assets.
PROFESSOR: Yes.
So this is the saving and borrowing strategy.
In good time, you try and acquire assets.
Could be financial assets or a cow or--
and in bad times, you liquidate them.
So you remember our friend Abu who
liquidizes the tree when things were going badly.

So what could you cope with risks?
Well, the first thing you could do is try and borrow.
In fact, again, going back to the above story,
we see that when he faces shocks-- like, for example,
when he has to pay for his mother's health care,
the first thing he does is to try
to borrow from the moneylender, from his landlord.
But we will see--
we'll have a unit on credit next week.
We'll see that the ability to borrow
is limited when you're poor-- precisely because you're poor
and you don't have any collateral
to put in front of it.
So maybe if you're poor, it's just difficult or impossible
to borrow.
So let's assume that for a minute.
And suppose that you cannot borrow,
all you can do is to save.
So you can try and invest.
And you can put-- save on your mattress, save in a bank,
try to invest in assets.
Now suppose your income follows an IID process.
Someone tells me what an IID process is?
Kind of mixed jargon.

Nobody knows or you're being shy?
Just you haven't necessarily done--
yeah?
STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] distributed?
PROFESSOR: Excellent.
Which means?
STUDENT: Every process independent
of each other and they all follow the same pattern.
PROFESSOR: Exactly.
So it means, for example, every period,
you throw a ball from an urn and you say, well,
today, your income is 100, and then you put it back in the urn
every period, it's from the same round,
so it's same distribution.
And it's independent in this case
because every time we draw, we put it back,
we draw, we put it back.
So as opposed to when there is correlation over time,
for example, it could be they are--
it could be that a good year is followed by another good year
or that you have, for example, you have a spell of bad years
or the opposite, good years always followed by a bad year.
So this would be an example of process that are not ideal.
Now assume that this is an IID process.
Now what you want to do, then, is if you don't like risk--
so you don't-- you feel--
when you're poor, you would like to consume--
the value of consuming a bit more
is higher than when you are, in general, things
are going better.
So what you would like--
this is what the notion of risk aversion recovers,
is what you would like is to smooth out and avoid as many
of the fluctuation of consumption as possible.
So if you cannot borrow the way you're going to do that
by-- if things are good, you're going to consume a bit and save
a bit.
If things are bad, you're going to draw into your assets
and liquidate the assets and consume
what you got this month, however little it
is, plus a fraction of all of your asset.
And what you can show is that in this settings,
a simple rule of thumb is nearly optimal, which
is nearly the best you can do, which is when you
have very little, you consume--
when you have very little cash on hand,
that's your income plus your assets, you eat all of it.
And otherwise, you save a fraction
of what's above some threshold.
So you leave some aside, and you consume some amount,
and you save a fraction of what's left on top of that.
So if you do that, things are going to-- your ability
to smooth out your consumption is
going to be really dependent on whether you have,
by luck, through this IID process,
happen to have a series of bad years or not.
So here is an example where the researcher just
drew a bunch of incomes.
This is work by Angus Deaton.
So he drew a bunch of income in an IID process with mean 100.
Then he shows in each period, given how much you have,
how much you save, and how much you consume--
so this is how much you consume.
And this is the assets you have, which
is whatever was left from before plus the difference
between your income and your consumption,
which could be positive or negative.
So either your asset accumulates in a period where you save.
So you see a series of good year here allows the person
to accumulate assets.
Then there is a bad year and the asset draws down.
And some other good years, they accumulate some more assets.
Then there is one bad year, the asset goes to 0.
The next year, the consumption is very low as a low point.
Then they have a series of good years,
they start accumulating assets.
Then that allows them to keep the consumption relatively
stable even though they have a series of bad years,
but here is a very low-income stock, asset go to 0 here,
consumption goes to very negative.
And you see like that, that even the consumption
is less bumpy than the income, so it goes some ways
to be able to save and borrow.
But you really can't avoid, with this strategy, some very bad
years unless you hit the bad year
so much that you're willing to accumulate like tons of assets.
In which case, the average level of consumption is much lower.
Here, it's around 60.
The average level of consumption becomes much lower
and you accumulate all of these assets.
So with just your consumption, just savings
if borrowing is not an option, the smoothing
is going to be limited and it's going
to be hard to avoid pretty miserable times.
In addition, you might not have very good savings options
to do that.
So you might end up having to save
in the form of, say, a cow, and then when you need to--
when you need to eat, you have to liquidate the cow.
So you sell the cow maybe at a low price or you eat it up.
So this leads people to have all sorts of inefficient production
strategy as well where suddenly, they find themselves
without cows to plow their fields because they had to sell
the cow in order to consume.
So that's not an ideal strategy.
We'll be talking more about savings as well,
but we see already the limits of this strategy as a consumption
smoothing method.