PROFESSOR: But nonetheless, you can
see that there are all these limits to informal insurance.
So the question is, why should the poor do it themselves?
Why wouldn't there be formal insurance?
So the magazine, Forbes, called microinsurance and unpenetrated
natural markets.
The poor need insurance.
We've discussed it.
Nobody can pay very much for insurance,
but there are many people, so someone
should be able to make money out of selling insurance
to the poor.
And yet, they don't.

The attempt at providing things like health or weather
insurance by for-profit company has been disappointing.
If you remember, at the actual fair price, only 40% of people
want insurance.
But really, if you wanted to run an insurance,
you'd have to share--
to charge more than the actual fair price.
You would have to charge more something like 14 CDs,
and at 14 CDs, less than 10% want it.
So why is that?

Well, one reason is that providing insurance
is inherently difficult. The first reason why it's difficult
is because of moral hazard, the same moral hazard
we saw before, which is the temptation that once you're
insured, you're going to behave a little bit differently.
The second problem is adverse selection,
which is the people who are insured might know something
that the insurer does not know.
And the third is simply the risk of outright fraud
that you can find in insurance.
So let's take, for health insurance,
how we might have all of this moral hazard,
adverse selection, and fraud.
So moral hazard, we've already seen that people already
like curative care too much, so if, in addition,
they don't have to pay anything for their care,
they might get too much care.

We also have seen that they get too little preventive care.
They might get even less preventive care
if they know that if something goes wrong,
they will be insured against it anyways.
So that's example of moral hazard
in the case of health insurance that insurers
are worried about.
Another type of things insurers might be worried about
is adverse selection.
Suppose that-- and this is the big debate
with the pre-existing conditions,
is suppose that I know something about my health
that the insurer doesn't know.
Then if I know that it's something
that means that I'm likely going to have large health
expenditure very soon, I might be particularly wanting
to sign up.
So if the insurer doesn't know, then it's
possible that they precisely don't
want to insure the people who most want to be insured,
and they have no way to measure that.
And the third problem is fraud, which
is that, perhaps, how do you prevent without very
good regulation enforcement, how do you prevent doctors
from charging for services which they do not actually perform?

So what's the solution?
The solution is to offer super simple product.
To avoid moral hazard and fraud, you
will only offer catastrophic health insurance
so people do not break their leg because they have insurance,
and they do not avoid accidents because they have insurance.
So the type of product that tend to be offered in developing
countries are hospitalization insurance, usually,
in a networked hospital which has been vetted before.
So you avoid both the fraud and the moral hazard
of a lot of overconsumption of health care.
So this is very partial insurance you're going to get.
You're only insured against big things.
And that, too, often, the insurance
put a cap on how the big things can
be so you're sure to not have to pay too often to very
specific facilities where you control the pricing,
and there is a limit on how much people are insured for.
So that limits the exposure of the insurance company.
To avoid adverse selection, you can make the insurance
compulsory for a pre-selected group of people, which
has nothing to do with health.
So for example, it became fashionable
at some stage to offer--
for microcredit organization to offer
micro-- to force their clients to take health insurance as
well.
So then the idea is that they've come for the credit,
and then, they get the insurance as well as additional benefit
that they actually have to pay for, but that's not a choice.
Now, the risk is that they all run away
from this, from the credit.
So you could still get adverse selection in the living margin.

So that's an example for health insurance.
And you can see that that leaves you
with products that are really very, very, very
imperfect, where the coverage is going
to be pretty limited, where you can use the insurance is going
to be very limited, and a lot of people
who don't happen to belong to an employer
or school or a specific job end up being covered.
So if that reminds you of the US situation pre-Obamacare,
that's not an accident.
This is exactly the same type of issues
that the US is grappling with, was its health insurance.
Another example of simple--
of simple insurance to respond to potential--
to these issues of moral hazard and adverse selection
is crop insurance.
So as we say, crop insurance we've seen already discussed.
The crop insurance could be prone to a moral hazard
and adverse selection.
Someone who knows to be insured might exercise less effort,
not take care of their crop.
Or you could choose a insurance for a field that
has a moral hazard problem.
On the adverse selection side, if you
know that the particular field is prone to disaster,
you might insure that field and not
insure the one that is always growing well,
so that creates this potential for adverse selection
and moral hazard if you were to give people a fully
well-formed insurance process.
So instead, what you have, instead of a proper crop
insurance, you can--
insurers tend to offer the type of product
we've seen in Ghana, where they offer rainfall index based
on a nearby weather station.
People can buy as much or as little as they want.
You can not have moral hazard.
You can not have adverse selection.
You can not have fraud, no administrative costs.
So that seems to be like, the ideal product.