INSTRUCTOR: Here is the other example.
This is the idea that people--
one possible strategy to mitigate the risk
would be to migrate.
But the problem is that migrate also carry out some risks.
So one of the potential strategy to limit the fluctuation income
is to take a risky strategy.
And if you are already poor, and therefore already
very reluctant to take on any risk,
you might not want to do that.
And this was illustrated beautifully by a paper
by Mushfiq Mobarak in Bangladesh and other co-authors
in Bangladesh during the Monga season.
So the Monga season is the dry season in
between harvests when incomes are very, very low
and calorie consumption is very, very low.
So if you remember Abu-- this was many years ago
in Bangladesh, but in places--
in some places in Bangladesh just before the harvest,
it's not that different, even today.
The level of calorie consumption is
on the order of 1,300 calories, 1,400 calories per person,
so truly insufficient.
So Mushfiq Mobarak and his co-author
were puzzled by the fact that people are not
migrating to the city when there are
jobs because the jobs in the city
are not nearly as seasonal.
Or for that matter, they could migrate
to another rural area that doesn't have quite
the same calendar, and they could work in the fields there,
but relatively few people do it.
So what they do is that they give people
a short-term migration incentive.
So it's a voucher.
It's roughly the cost of the bus ticket, which people
can get if they agree to move to the city
during the Monga season.
So think about subsidizing your migration.
So that's hopefully how the program works.
So the poor individuals, those who have less than half
an acre of land, who have household members who
have missed meals during the lean season,
are given the transportation subsidy.
Then the ones who want, which is about half of them,
move to an urban area with better wages.
They make more money.
They send some of them home.
The impact that they see on the households that stay at home
is about 30% to 35% increase in household expenditure
and increase in calorie consumption of 750 calories.
So that's basically the difference
between being near starvation and being properly fed,
about one extra meal per person and per day, so
a pretty large effect.
And then after that, they return home,
and it continues like that.
So that suggests that migration is
an effective coping strategy.
And the puzzle, in a way, is, OK, this is an effective coping
strategy.
Why isn't it in your portfolio of coping strategies?
And why are people not doing it that much on their own?
And in fact, even after doing it once, only half
of the people who do it once do it
again on their own the next year.
And one reason-- so in the paper, they talk about the fact
that this is this worry about the risk,
the risk of migrating.
But you can feel the tension because if you're
so risk-averse, then you should feel particularly miserable
when your consumption level is very low.
So on the one hand, you're worried
about the risk when you go to the city,
but on the other hand, precisely the same type
of people who would be worried about the risk
should be the ones who are very miserable to be
feeling particularly poor.
So that suggests that there is something not entirely coherent
in our attitude to risk.
And one possible explanation is something
called loss aversion, which was introduced by Kahneman
and Richard Thaler--
Kahneman and Tversky.
Sorry.
You can read-- if you're interested in reading more
about that, you can read this book, Thinking
Fast and Thinking Slow, which is very nicely written
and has a lot of things about psychology,
including this idea of loss aversion.
And the idea of loss aversion is that we
hate to be doing something that makes something worse.

So we are quite miserable.
We don't eat properly.
Our children are missing meals, but at least
it's not our fault. It's the lean season.
And we don't want to be taking an action that
could potentially take away from what we have.
So people suffer more from taking an action that
fails than from not taking an action that
could lead to a success that is comparable or even greater.
So that makes people very reluctant to do something.
That makes people more reluctant to undertake these activities
that could have a lot of upside potential but potential
downside risk.
I don't want to be the ones who are paying $20 for the bus
ticket, go to the city, and they find nothing,
and they have to come back in shame.
So let me stop here with this point which
you can ponder about for the next five
minutes of the break, which is, but where is insurance?
We have discussed these various coping strategies
at the individual level.
We've seen that when you manage to get there and insure
the poor, they, in fact, take advantage.
In fact, they have an example--
in the Monga paper, they introduce
a sort of insurance instead of the bus ticket,
and that seems to work also.
So we see that insurance does seem to change
the way people behave.
So where is insurance?
We see that risk is costly for the poor.
We also see that insurance would help them greatly.
So why are they not insured by official insurance companies
or by their friends and relatives?
Stay tuned for the second half of this lecture
after our five-minutes break.